COMMITTED TO
IMPROVING THE STATE
OF THE WORLD

Global Risks 2010
A Global Risk Network Report

A World Economic Forum Report
in collaboration with

Citi
Marsh & McLennan Companies (MMC)
Swiss Re
Wharton School Risk Center
Zurich Financial Services

World Economic Forum
January 2010

The information in this report, or on which this report is based, has been obtained from sources that the authors believe to
be reliable and accurate. However, it has not been independently verified and no representation or warranty, express or
implied, is made as to the accuracy or completeness of any information obtained from third parties. In addition, the
statements in this report may provide current expectations of future events based on certain assumptions and include any
statement that does not directly relate to a historical fact or a current fact. These statements involve known and unknown
risks, uncertainties and other factors which are not exhaustive. The companies contributing to this report operate in a
continually changing environment and new risks emerge continually. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on
these statements. The companies contributing to this report undertake no obligation to publicly revise or update any
statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise and they shall in no event be liable for any
loss or damage arising in connection with the use of the information in this report.

This work was prepared by the Global Risk Network of the World Economic Forum.
World Economic Forum
91-93 route de la Capite
CH-1223 Cologny/Geneva
Switzerland
Tel.: +41 (0)22 869 1212
Fax: +41 (0)22 786 2744
E-mail: globalrisks@weforum.org
www.weforum.org
© 2010 World Economic Forum
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted
in any form or by any means, including photocopying and recording, or by any
information storage and retrieval system.

ISBN: 92-95044-31-2
978-92-95044-31-9
REF: 201209

7

2

6

1

5

31

19

34

4

50-250 billion

30 29
14 23

13

16
3

21
20

10

24

26

8

15 9

32
35

10-50 billion

Severity (in US$)

250 billion-1 trillion more than 1 trillion

Figure 1: Global Risks Landscape 2010: Likelihood with Severity by Economic Loss

25

22
17

36
28

11 27

18

12

2-10 billion

33

below 1%

1-5%

5-10%

10-20%

above 20%

Likelihood
Source: World Economic Forum 2010

,JVUVTPJ9PZRZ
 -VVKWYPJL]VSH[PSP[`
 6PSWYPJLZWPRLZ
 4HQVY-HSSPU[OL<:
 :SV^PUN*OPULZLLJVUVT`# 
 -PZJHSJYPZLZ
 (ZZL[WYPJLJVSSHWZL
 9L[YLUJOTLU[MYVTNSVIHSPaH[PVUKL]LSVWLK
 9L[YLUJOTLU[MYVTNSVIHSPaH[PVULTLYNPUN
 )\YKLUVMYLN\SH[PVU
 <UKLYPU]LZ[TLU[PUPUMYHZ[Y\J[\YL

.LVWVSP[PJHS9PZRZ
 0U[LYUH[PVUHS[LYYVYPZT
 5\JSLHYWYVSPMLYH[PVU
 0YHU
 5VY[O2VYLH
 (MNOHUPZ[HUPUZ[HIPSP[`
 ;YHUZUH[PVUHSJYPTLHUKJVYY\W[PVU
 0ZYHLS7HSLZ[PUL
 0YHX
  .SVIHSNV]LYUHUJLNHWZ

,U]PYVUTLU[HS9PZRZ
 ,_[YLTL^LH[OLY
 +YV\NO[ZHUKKLZLY[PÄJH[PVU
 >H[LYZJHYJP[`
 5H[*H[!*`JSVUL
 5H[*H[!,HY[OX\HRL
 5H[*H[!0USHUKÅVVKPUN
 5H[*H[!*VHZ[HSÅVVKPUN
 (PYWVSS\[PVU
 )PVKP]LYZP[`SVZZ

:VJPL[HS9PZRZ
  7HUKLTPJ
 0UMLJ[PV\ZKPZLHZLZ
 *OYVUPJKPZLHZLZ
 3PHIPSP[`YLNPTLZ
 4PNYH[PVU

;LJOUVSVNPJHS9PZRZ
 *YP[PJHSPUMVYTH[PVUPUMYHZ[Y\J[\YL*00IYLHRKV^U
 5HUVWHY[PJSL[V_PJP[`
 +H[HMYH\KSVZZ
Global Risks 2010 | 1

2 | Global Risks 2010

Contents

Preface

4

Executive Summary

5

1. The Global Risks Landscape 2010

7

2. Fiscal Crises and Unemployment

14

3. Underinvestment in Infrastructure

18

4. Chronic Diseases

24

5. Risks to Keep on the Radar
– Transnational crime and corruption
– Biodiversity loss
– Critical information systems and cyber-vulnerability

27
27
29
31

6. Managing Global Risks: Understanding Systemic Vulnerabilities
– Developing a holistic approach to risk management at the country level
– How corporations can apply the findings of Global Risks 2010

33
33
34

Conclusion

36

Appendix 1: Processes and Definitions

37

Appendix 2: Global Risks Barometer 2010

38

Contributors and Acknowledgements

46

Global Risks 2010 | 3

Preface

Forty years ago, the inaugural Meeting of what
would later become the World Economic Forum Annual
Meeting was held in Davos. At this historic milestone
in the life of the organization comes the fifth edition of
the Forum’s Global Risks Report, Global Risks 2010.
Throughout its previous editions, this report has outlined
some of the top issues most likely to come to the fore
of the global risks landscape and stressed the need for
a multistakeholder approach to address them. Global
risks do not manifest themselves in isolation, neither
geographically nor in time. This fundamental premise
of the Forum’s work on risks has become particularly
pertinent since the onset of the financial crisis. As
Global Risks 2010 highlights, we are in a world with
unprecedented levels of interconnectedness between
all areas of risk.
At this critical juncture, the need to redress imbalances,
change incentives and improve global understanding
and cooperation remains the top priority if future
challenges are to be met with the right solutions and
sufficient levels of preparedness. Global governance
gaps already featured prominently in Global Risks 2009
and 2010 will be no different; they are part of a series
of issues highlighted in this report, which due to their
endemic and systemic nature can only be addressed
by a fundamental overhaul of current values and
behaviours. The effects of these risks will not only
be felt over the coming year but will also influence
decision-making well into the new decade. Inherent
to these problems is the fact that they concern
stakeholders from all spheres and regions across the
world – the multistakeholder aspect of global risks, which
renders it more difficult to manage them.

4 | Global Risks 2010

Through its analysis of the interconnectedness
between risks, Global Risks 2010 again emphasizes the
need for more effective global governance structures to
unlock the resolution of many of the issues highlighted
in this report. However, to succeed, these structures
will need to be supported by leaders willing to reconcile
often diverging agenda and able to address the longterm structural issues at hand as well as the immediate
problems. They will also need to consider the direct and
indirect social implications of their policies. Legitimacy,
accountability, clarity, concerted action: these are the
keywords of efficient global risk management and
effective global governance. The World Economic
Forum has long promoted thinking about how these
goals can be achieved, through reports such as this,
and its activities and initiatives.
This fifth edition, Global Risks 2010, has been made
possible through the valuable insights of experts from
the Forum’s Global Risk Network and Global Agenda
Councils, together with the continued support of our
partners: Citi, Marsh & McLennan Companies (MMC),
Swiss Re, The Wharton School Risk Center and
Zurich Financial Services. By consulting this group of
experts and academics across the world throughout
the year and relaying their findings in this annual report,
Global Risks 2010 seeks to provide political and business
leaders with a framework for further discussion of a
risk landscape that is ever more complex and urges a
consideration of the longer term, global implications of
risks in areas beyond their immediate focus. These
risks must be addressed collectively so opportunities
can be found in their complexity.

Klaus Schwab
Founder and Executive Chairman
World Economic Forum

Executive Summary
After the shock to the global financial system and world
economy in 2008, 2009 was a year of appraisal and
adjustment. The risk landscape that this report has
explored over the past five editions has in fact changed
remarkably little. What has changed dramatically is the
level of recognition that global risks, like the world, are
now tightly interconnected and shocks and vulnerabilities
are truly global, even if impact and response can still
differ at the “local” level. This recognition is illustrated
by the increased number of interlinkages on the 2010
Risks Interconnection Map (RIM)1.

Cross-cutting themes
Three themes provide the backdrop for discussion in
this report. As the first chapter discusses, the increase
in interconnections among risks means a higher
level of systemic risk than ever before. Thus, there
is a greater need for an integrated and more systemic
approach to risk management and response by the
public and private sectors alike. Second, while sudden
shocks can have a huge impact, be they serious
geopolitical incidents, terrorist attacks or natural
catastrophes, the biggest risks facing the world today
may be from slow failures or creeping risks.
Because these failures and risks emerge over a long
period of time, their potentially enormous impact and
long-term implications can be vastly underestimated.
These are risks linked to big shifts that are recognized
and which will roll out over many years, even decades.
For example, global population growth, ageing and
the ensuing rise in consumption have implications for
resources, climate change, health and fiscal policy.
The emergence of multiple poles of economic and
geopolitical influence is another shift. At the same time
two nations, China and the US, will probably play a
determining role through their choice of saving and
investment paths. Finally, the third theme picks up
the discussion of global governance gaps from last
year’s report. In light of ongoing short-term pressures
on governments, business and individuals, can the
necessary reform of global governance be achieved
across the range of issues where it is required?
Improved coordination on macro-prudential supervision,
effective climate and energy policies, and new
mechanisms to protect resources and security are
all key to reducing vulnerability and risk. The next
years will test the political will, vision and willingness
of governments, business and individuals alike to make
tough choices and manage the challenges ahead.

Risks in focus
This year’s report explores a set of risks that share a
potential for wider systemic impact and are strongly
linked to a number of significant, long-term trends.
First, there are those which feature highly on the Global
Risks Landscape and which predated the recession
but have been exacerbated by its impact through
greater resources constraints or short-term thinking.
These include:
• Fiscal crises and the social and political
implications of high unemployment
• Underinvestment in infrastructure, both new and
existing, and its consequences for growth, resource
scarcity and climate change adaptation
• Chronic diseases and their impact on both
advanced economies and developing countries
The report also notes how concerns over further
asset bubbles remain strong, as indicated by the
Global Risk Network Partner’s assessment for the Global
Risks Landscape.
The other risks discussed in this report are equally
systemic in nature and also require better global
governance but they currently feature less prominently
on the Global Risks Landscape. The report raises
these risks to understand if there is an “awareness
gap” around these areas and suggests that they
should not be forgotten in the focus on an integrated
and longer term view of risks. These risks include:
transnational crime and corruption; biodiversity
loss; and cyber-vulnerability.
None of these risks feature in the upper right-hand
quadrant of the Global Risks Landscape, but they are
all connected to a range of other risks more likely to
occur and with greater severity over the next 10 years.
Thus, their impact will be truly global and crossindustry, and will affect individuals as they will
businesses or governments.
The 2010 Global Risks Landscape is as crowded as
ever. This report does not aim to cover all of the risks
tracked by the Forum’s Global Risk Network. The
landscape offers a view of where each risk lies relative
to others. Indeed, the core set of risks behind the
report are not exhaustive: it has evolved and will
continue to be refined and adjusted as new issues
emerge on the 10-year horizon. Some risks are not
addressed in this edition, not because they are less
important but because of the constraints of length and
the need for focus. In particular, though cognizant of

1 An interactive version of the Risks Interconnection Map (RIM) is available at www.weforum.org/globalrisks

Global Risks 2010 | 5

their weight, the discussion in this year’s report only
touches on a few of the many geopolitical risks on the
landscape. Afghanistan featured highly in discussions
throughout the year, with concerns that the level of
instability in the country poses a threat for its own
population and the troubling events that are unfolding
in neighbouring Pakistan. As discussed in last year’s
report, though many of the geopolitical risks identified
by the Global Risk Network may appear intractable
and limited in their geographic reach, in reality each
has an impact in terms of human suffering and the
burden on development and growth. Each of these
can be a source of wider regional instability or even
broader conflict.
Decision-making in an interconnected world
The objective of the work of the Global Risk Network
is to raise awareness of the level of interconnections
among risks and the global impact of those
interconnections. The report offers a framework for
decision-makers to look at risks in an integrated
manner and to provide an impetus to different
stakeholders to focus on ways to manage systemic
risks more effectively. The events of the past two
years have shown how costly slow failures can be
when they erupt in systems. The lessons learned were
numerous but must be remembered and acted on in
other areas, not only in the sphere of finance and
economics. Much discussion has rightly centred on
behaviour change and governance, but both are
highly dependent on political and individual will and
the choices acted on by decision-makers. For
behaviour to evolve, a concerted effort is needed to
provide the right mix of information, incentives and
institutions; to stretch people’s time horizons and
make them understand exactly what is at risk. All of
this requires a longer term approach than usually
dictated by electoral cycles or indeed financial
reporting and executive tenure. The Forum is driving
some of the thinking on how to work towards longterm solutions, while managing the immediate
challenges. Its Global Redesign Initiative has this goal
at its core: it leverages the Forum’s convening power
to focus the minds of all stakeholders on new models
of governance to manage complexity and risks to
global growth and well-being. Equally, by taking the
10-year perspective and exploring interconnections,
experts who contribute to the work of the Global Risk
Network focus on the context in which strategies and
policies are formed and the decisions taken to anticipate
and manage, rather than merely reacting to risks.

6 | Global Risks 2010

1. The Global Risks Landscape 2010
The rationale behind the 2010 highlighted risks
The choice of risks to focus on in the annual report is
driven by several factors. The more highly interlinked the
risk, the more its impact and severity is amplified, so its
level of interconnectedness on the Risks Interconnection
Map (RIM) (Figure 13, page 33) and its position on the
Global Risks Landscape (Figure 1, page 1) are important.
Hence, using these criteria and the input from roundtables
with the Global Risk Network throughout the year, the
following risks were selected as the focus of discussion
in this report: Fiscal Crises, Underinvestment in
Infrastructure and Chronic Diseases.
These risks are covered through the lens of the
themes that emerged from these different sources
in society and the global economy over the next 10
years: systemic and creeping risks; global shifts; and
the tension between the need for effective global
governance and collective commitment to risk
management and adaptation, with the often pressing
and divergent priorities on regional, national and
corporate agenda.
Fiscal crises
In response to the financial crisis, many countries are at
risk of overextending unsustainable levels of debt, which,
in turn, will exert strong upwards pressures on real
interest rates. In the final instance, unsustainable debt
levels could lead to full-fledged sovereign debt crises.
Underinvestment in infrastructure
Multiple studies across the world repeatedly
highlighted that vast segments of our water, energy or
transport infrastructure are structurally deficient or
functionally obsolete, requiring considerable annual
investments to avoid catastrophic failure.
Chronic diseases
As a consequence of profound socio-demographical
transitions among large sections of the world population,
changing physical and dietary habits, chronic diseases
including cancer, diabetes, cardiovascular and chronic
respiratory disease are continuing to spread rapidly
throughout the developed and developing world, driving
up health costs while reducing productivity and
economic growth.
A note on three other key risks
While not explored in depth in this edition, “asset
price collapse”, “China’s growth falling to less
than 6%” and “Afghanistan” featured highly on the
Global Risks Landscape. All are referred to in the

following chapters and indeed Global Risks 2008
discussed asset price collapse and its implications for
systemic financial risk. The role of China is referred to
through several sections of this report and will remain
to the fore of the Global Risk Network’s dialogue over
the coming year and beyond.
Asset price collapse
The last edition of this report discussed the longer
term implications of the financial crisis, exploring the
tight interconnections among economic and resourcerelated risks. The fact that the risk of an asset price
collapse remains the strongest risk on the landscape
on the severity and likelihood axes illustrates the
continuing uncertainty about the resilience of the
global economy and the effectiveness of fiscal and
monetary responses, governance and regulation.
Concerns abound about the decline in the dollar and
low interest rates fuelling another bubble, this time
liquidity rather than debt-driven. Experts are also
worried about a lag in the impact of the recession in
a number of areas. The level of corporate bankruptcies,
particularly among small and medium size enterprises
remains high. Credit card default rates, which are
highly correlated with unemployment, are already at
historic levels. The current unemployment rate of more
than 10% in the US is considerably higher than the
6.5% unemployment rate that most credit card
lending models assume. Finally, though residential
house prices have fallen considerably in those markets
considered to have been the most overheated, concerns
persist about commercial real estate. As illustrated by
the events in Dubai in December 2009, debt loads
remain high; as refinancing needs arise, which are
only expected to peak between 2011 and 2013, further
shocks could emerge.
China’s growth falling to 6% or less
China appears to have successfully navigated the
financial crisis and global recession. However, much of
the domestic impulses derive from high credit growth,
which entails an increased risk of misallocation of
capital and renewed bubbles in financial asset prices
and real estate. These can always carry the risk of a
sharp and potentially recessionary correction. A loss in
China’s growth momentum could adversely affect
global capital and commodity markets. The Chinese
government faces a number of challenges: the need
to increase domestic demand to counter the loss in
exports and the need to maintain a stable renminbi
given China’s vast accumulation of foreign reserves.

Global Risks 2010 | 7

The implications of a fall in China’s growth would be
particularly acute for its trading partners if it should
happen before the global economy is on a more
resilient path.
Afghanistan
Though geopolitical risks were not the focus of this
year’s report, among those tracked by the Global Risk
Network, including Iran and Israel-Palestinian Territories,
Afghanistan emerged highest on the Global Risks
Landscape. It is also linked to nearly all the other
geopolitical risks and several economic risks on the
RIM. Moreover, Afghanistan’s instability cannot be
dissociated from rising concerns over the situation in
Pakistan. The border between the two countries has
become a hotspot.
The instability in the region is already a source of
suffering for the local population. Their plight is
compounded by the stress that rapid population
growth and the impact of climate change are placing
on resources, in particular water. Afghanistan’s population
(currently 28 million) is expected to increase by over
30% in less than 10 years. Pakistan’s population is set
to reach 225 million within a decade (from 41 million
at independence in 1949). The World Bank has warned
that population growth is already causing water stress
and could soon result in outright scarcity. The social
and economic consequences of this should be as
much a focus for the international community as the
geopolitical implications.
The Risks Interconnection Map 2010 (RIM)
The 2010 Risks Interconnection Map (RIM) (Figure 13,
page 33) shows the results of the 2010 Global Risks
Expert Perception Survey, which the World Economic
Forum runs every year to survey experts in several
disciplines2 all over the world on their perception of
risk interdependencies and relations.
Governance gaps
Global governance gaps remain high on the Global
Risks Landscape and are the most significant source
of risk in terms of interconnectedness, meaning that
independent from the expert’s background the risk of
governance gaps has been selected most of the time
as a top connection and highly related to other risks.
This shows that experts have identified weak or
inadequate institutions or agreements in almost all of
the risks covered. However, it also raises a red flag in

terms of expectations as to which fields and concrete
issues global governance bodies should take steps
and get involved. Thus, the Forum is examining where
the biggest gaps in governance are and how these
gaps might be addressed with the tools and thinking
of the 21st century.
Global governance’s relation with geopolitical risks has
not changed from 2009. Economic and environmental
risks are the areas where there has been a marked
increase in the perception of interdependencies. This
suggests that the recession and the Copenhagen
Climate Conference 2009 call for collaboration have
had an impact on heightening awareness, developing
insights and understanding risk interrelations, which
has been translated in our survey in the form of more
and stronger connections with this particular risk. It
also reinforces the message of the Global Risks 2009
report of how crucial it is to focus on global governance
not as an end in itself but as a means to address
many critical global risks over the coming years.
Retrenchment from globalization
Throughout the year and across different countries,
experts from the Global Risk Network have convened
to reflect on and debate the outlook for the Global
Risks Landscape over the coming years. On several
occasions, experts have expressed concern that it is
highly likely the next economic cycle will be politically
more unstable once the global economy emerges
from the current crisis. Despite a significant drop in
global trade and investment flows, these are now
recovering and the expected backlash to globalization
has not materialized, trade disputes have not
increased and the rise of the G20 has been welcomed
as recognition that a wider group of countries has a
role to play on the global stage. However, should the
recovery progress without a concomitant improvement in
employment, the risk of “retrenchment from globalization”
(in both developed and emerging countries) could
emerge more strongly. Rising protectionism, coupled
with the macroeconomic instability and social unrest
due to rising unemployment, adds pressure to the
global outlook. Some elements of recent stimulus
packages could be read as protectionist measures,
discouraging cross-border investment flows. A
sustainable recovery will require healthy flows of trade,
investment and people and any moves to counter
these should be watched with caution.

2 Expertise of the Global Risk Network includes academics and practitioners in the areas of economics, geopolitics, environment, society and technology.

8 | Global Risks 2010

Figure 2

Global governance gaps interconnections

Economics

Geopolitics

Environment

Society

Technology

Source: World Economic Forum 2010

It is important to take into account that retrenchment
from globalization goes beyond protectionist economic
policies. A political or social backlash to globalization
generating high levels of social turbulence or destabilizing
a government is also incorporated in this risk. A major
retrenchment coming from areas other than economic
policy, such as societal attitudes toward multilateralism,
will have equally damaging consequences on growth
and development worldwide.
As global governance institutions and the remodelling
of multilateralism become a channel to adjust to current
challenges, national interests must correspond, support
and adhere to global governance organizations and
agreements. Given the unprecedented levels of
interconnectedness, global leaders from all spheres

need to find a common platform to debate and push
forward reforms and policies to ensure a sustainable
global economy.
Increasing interconnectedness: systemic risks,
systemic responses
One of the major conclusions from the analysis of
the results of the 2010 Global Risks Expert Perception
Survey which drives the RIM (Figure 13, page 33)3 is
the marked increase in interconnectedness among
the risks covered by the Global Risk Network (see
inside front cover for the risk descriptions). Risk
interdependency has always been at the core of our
analysis but, particularly this year, it seems to have
gained even more attention and generated strong

3 The Global Risks Expert Perception Survey was conducted between July and October 2009. More than 200 experts from The Global Risk Network and the
Forum’s Global Agenda Councils were surveyed to assess the likelihood, severity and interconnections of the risks in our taxonomy. This report shows the results
referring to the interconnections identified by the experts.

Global Risks 2010 | 9

interest among experts of different disciplines. This
year’s survey shows that both the number and strength
of interconnections among risks have increased notably.
This upsurge can be interpreted as an indication of
success in terms of improving the awareness, discussion
and, in some cases, understanding of systemic risks.
In Global Risks 2008, systemic financial risk was
described as a system-wide financial crisis typically
accompanied by a sharp decline in asset values and
economic activity and an abrupt loss of liquidity. During
the last 18 months, there has been a significant amount
of debate about the systemic nature of the financial
crisis, its unintended consequences, and the appropriate
strategies and policies which will create more resilient
systems. The crisis unveiled fundamental questions
about our ability to manage systemic failures. Systemic
risks are inherent to every system, not only the financial
industry. However, the universal scope of the financial
crisis has raised awareness of interconnections and
revealed the importance of thinking differently about
the risk landscape, highlighting the key premise of the
Forum’s Global Risks work: global risks do not
manifest themselves in isolation.
Since the Bretton Woods agreements in 1944, it is the
first time where global leaders around the world agreed
on the urgent need to reform the global financial system.
However, real political will is necessary to muster
cooperation adapted to today’s reality and challenges.
The response and management of the current crisis
must also be systemic and global and it goes beyond
financial market interventions. The increasing relevance
of the G20 reflects the greater role that many emerging
market countries are playing and a step towards
healthier international cooperation and coordination.
The financial crisis and ensuing recession uncovered
major weaknesses and revealed just how interdependent
the world has become. A major improvement of our
insights into these interdependencies is essential to
tackle the origins of the crisis and to avoid repetition
in the future. Effective regulation will be part of the
solution. Systems need a certain level of flexibility to
adapt to changing environments. Global decision-makers
and regulators need to provide an adequate degree
of freedom, while ensuring that regulation is effective
in reducing risks through the necessary oversight
and safeguards.

10 | Global Risks 2010

In the Global Risks Landscape 2010 (Figure 1,
page 1), economic risks continue to feature as having
the highest estimated potential severity of economic
loss. This illustrates that the world economy is still in
intensive care and that concerns remain about the
adequacy of its global governance and measures taken
at the national level. The prominence of the G20 as
the group responding to the financial crisis represents
a first step towards a better and more coordinated
international policy-making process. Still, its efficacy has
not been sufficient to fully galvanize leaders into taking
action to push major reforms in global governance
bodies and more effort needs to be devoted to this.

A definition of systemic risk
A systemic risk is the potential loss or damage
to an entire system as contrasted with the loss
to a single unit of that system. Systemic risks
are exacerbated by interdependencies among
the units often because of weak links in the
system. These risks can be triggered by
sudden events or built up over time with the
impact often being large and possibly
catastrophic.

Figure 3

The risks of a global governance gap and retrenchment from globalization

Global governance gap risk
Source: Zurich Financial Services 2010G

As a consequence of the financial crisis and the fallout from the global recession, the risks of a widening global
governance gap and retrenchment from globalization feature prominently in the global risks map. Introduced in
last year’s report, the “global governance gap” is seen as likely and severe going into 2010, as in 2009, and
there is a similar high overall assessment for the risk of a retrenchment from globalization.
Given the importance of both risks, the question remains how they affect individual countries. To do so we
first translated the high-level definition of global risks into individual country risk metrics. To assess the global
governance gap, we measured the degree in which countries participate in existing institutions of global
governance, such as bodies governing trade, finance, environment, anti-terrorism, health and humanitarian
activities. Likewise, to assess the risk of a retrenchment from globalization, we measured a country’s involvement
mainly, but not exclusively, in global trade and capital flows. Using an approach based on game theory, we
assumed that countries staying on the sideline will eventually be sanctioned by the global community.
Consequently, they are more exposed to these risks.

Global Risks 2010 | 11

The risk of not addressing slow moving shifts
The Global Risk Network experts agreed in events and
workshops throughout the year that predicting the
next crisis is a risk in itself. However, there are largescale, slow-moving shifts already underway for which
current levels of preparedness are insufficient and
whose implications could have far-reaching and highly
costly consequences. Independently of what shape
the global recovery will take, we might have expected
that the “quake” in the fundamentals would lead to a
significant behavioural change and systemic overhaul
of norms and practices. This shift has not yet
materialized, partially because signs of recovery came
relatively fast in some areas and behavioural changes
take time. It is slow in part because humans gravitate
to what they know and postpone dealing with what
they see as future risks. The result of maintaining the
status quo and not pursuing major changes at an
individual, business and government level is not an
option any longer.

Today’s challenges emerged in part from a lack of
understanding of risk interconnectedness in the past.
The slow-moving shifts seen today will be harmful in
the next decade if we ignore their magnitude and the
scope of their consequences. Some, such as chronic
diseases might continue at their current pace. Others,
such as underinvestment in energy infrastructure or IT
security, might reach a tipping point and provoke a
sudden shock. From our taxonomy of risks, we can
identify some slow-moving shifts with a noteworthy
potential effect globally. These big shifts are not new,
neither in our taxonomy nor in the global debate. But
in the midst of the economic turbulence, it is of utmost
importance that they are addressed by the many policy
and corporate decisions, as their materialization could
be a catalyst for another systemic crisis. The worst
case scenario of overlapping economic recessions with
political instability and social turbulence, triggered by
untenable fiscal deficits and unsustainable government
debt burdens, might not, after all, be impossible.

A retrospective of the Global Risks Report
To mark the fifth year of Global Risks, we would like to take a moment to review the publication’s goals. The
Global Risk Network (GRN) was established in 2004 with a view to responding to a growing desire among
Forum Members and constituents to understand and explore how risks were interconnected and the implications
of those relationships over a 10-year time frame. Through a process of research and consultation, the GRN
defined the criteria for global risks and identified an initial set of risks, which has been expanded over the past
years. The GRN published its first Global Risks in 2006. Another important aspect of the work is the recognition
that in today’s globalized environment, risks can have enormous systemic implications and no one country,
industry or organization can deal with them in isolation. Global risks require collective thinking and responses.
Thus, the objective of the report is to build awareness of these factors and to offer a common framework for
dialogue and responses among leaders from business, government, international institutions and other
stakeholder groups.
A framework to track and assess risk
The report has evolved over the last five years by reflecting the unique events and risk trends that evolve through
each year, while maintaining a long-term perspective on a set of core risks. The report does not predict when or
how specific risks could occur. The Global Risk Network draws heavily on qualitative expert opinion rather than
focusing only on historic data. This match of facts and expert analysis is an approach that avoids the work falling
into a silo approach. While the risk landscape has evolved relatively gradually over the past five years, the
awareness of interconnections among risks appears to have steadily risen.
In its first year, the Global Risks 2006 Report identified current and emerging risks, and looked at the links
between them and implications over a 10-year time horizon. Global Risks 2007 focused on the fundamental
disconnect between risk and mitigation, emphasizing that exercises in risk assessment are futile if they do not
encourage action on the part of decision-makers. In 2008, a full section was devoted to dealing with the
globalization of risk and rising interconnectedness as a series of risk issues, such as the financial crisis and
concerns over the long-term security of food supply, focused attention on the fragility of the global economy.
Last year’s report warned against losing sight of longer term risks in the face of overwhelming short-term challenges.

12 | Global Risks 2010

As a reminder, the report is released in January of each year, based on analysis conducted in the third and fourth
quarters of the previous year. The key risks and focus of each year’s report are summarized in Figure 4 below.

Figure 4

Key risks and themes from the Global Risks reports over the past five years
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

• Asset
prices/indebtedness
• Chinese growth
slowing to < 6%
• Fiscal crises
• Oil price
spikes/supply
shocks
• US current account
deficit/fall in US$
• Critical information
infrastructure

• Asset
prices/indebtedness
• Chinese growth
slowing to < 6%
• Fiscal crises
• Oil price
spikes/supply
shocks
• US current account
deficit/fall in US$

• Asset
prices/indebtedness
• Chinese growth
slowing to < 6%
• Fiscal crises
• Oil price
spikes/supply
shocks
• Rising and volatile
food prices
• An abrupt, major fall
in the value of the
US$

• Asset price collapse
• Chinese growth
slowing to < 6%
• Fiscal crises
• Global governance
gaps
• Chronic diseases
• Increase resourcerelated risk (water,
land and energy)

• Further falls in asset
prices
• Chinese growth
slowing to < 6%
• Fiscal crises
• Global governance
gaps
• Chronic diseases
• Underinvestment in
infrastructure

As Figure 4 highlights, though the number of risks it examines have evolved over the last five years, there are
several issues that have remained constant. Concerns about fiscal crises have featured since the outset, as did
concerns about overinflated levels of asset prices and indebtedness. The latter shifted to a concern about asset
price collapse in January 2008, before the full impact of the financial crisis hit. Infrastructure was a focus in 2006,
only to reappear in this year’s report, perhaps a sign that long-term thinking is seen as critical given the events of
the past years. Finally, the implication of a decline in China’s growth has been a constant since the first edition of
the report. Thus far, this risk has not materialized but it is clearly one that would have considerable implications for
China and also for the global economy.

Global Risks 2010 | 13

2. Fiscal Crises and Unemployment

The financial crisis triggered a broader and deeper
crisis of confidence among business, investors
and consumers. Central banks intervened with
unprecedented measures to ensure liquidity and
prevent systemic collapse. In response to the ensuing
global recession, governments intervened in many
countries with record stimulus packages to boost
demand. Though their intervention proved vital,
governments now need to avoid becoming the main
cause of the next crisis.
Government debt has reached historical levels for peace
time in a number of advanced economies. Though
necessary at the time, the costs of their interventions,
combined with the long-standing burden of pensions and
health spending, have left several major economies in
a historically weak fiscal position with mounting debt.
Collectively, G20 budget deficits now stand at 7.9%
of their combined GDP4.
With a few exceptions, the larger advanced economies
have been the most affected by fiscal crises. According
to the IMF, by 2014, the average debt-to-GDP ratio of
advanced economies that are members of the G20 is
expected to climb from the 2007 pre-crisis level of 78%
to 118%. In sharp contrast, emerging economies, with
smaller governments and lower exposure to the banking
crisis, kept their fiscal houses in order. According to
the same IMF analysis, between 2007 and 2014 the
average debt-to-GDP ratio of emerging countries that
are members of the G20 will never exceed 40%. For
once, and in contrast to the 1980s and 1990s, emerging
economies are not causal to a global fiscal crisis.
Governments, in the US and the United Kingdom in
particular, are now faced with a set of tough choices,
all with consequences for future global risks. The
most pressing is how to time a gradual and credible
withdrawal of fiscal stimulus so that the recovery is
sustained but not so late that fiscal deficits cause
fears of sovereign debt deterioration and a flight to
safety that could drain their economies of capital and
confidence. Governments need to develop sound exit
strategies and communicate them clearly to reassure
investors and taxpayers.

The implications for social systems: a new social
contract for the 21st century?
The difficulties posed by the combination of weak fiscal
positions and long-term pressures from current social
spending trajectories are considerable. A generational
approach that also accounts for the fiscal burden facing
current and future generations (accounting mainly for
social security and government-supported healthcare)
reveals huge fiscal gaps. According to one estimate5,
the United States alone has to reckon with a gap of
US$ 66 trillion, a figure more than five times current
GDP and almost double the US national wealth. Similar
outsized generational debt-to-GDP ratios are obtained
for many other advanced economies.
Intergenerational accounting makes it clear that a
business as usual approach to fiscal policy is
unsustainable. Advanced economies in particular
must face the difficult task of reforming their social
security systems. Many current models for health,
pensions, education and unemployment protection
were designed to meet the needs of populations in
growing economies with comparatively short life
expectancies. This has changed dramatically. Today,
people live longer, and the share of retired people
that will have to be supported by the working population
in pay-as-you-go social security schemes keeps
increasing, placing huge strains on the costs and
efficacy of social systems. Although some systems
appear to be more effective, in particular those of
Scandinavia, none are designed to meet future needs
and the fiscal burden they represent was already
becoming untenable before the crisis. The costs of
social safety nets will have to be better shared among
the population and the expectations of people in terms
of health and pensions will have to be realigned. This
may require politicians to implement unpopular decisions
at a time when voters are suffering from the hardship of
high unemployment caused by the global recession.

4 International Monetary Fund, The State of Public Finances Cross-Country Fiscal Monitor: November 2009
5 Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Is the US bankrupt? Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, July/August 2006

14 | Global Risks 2010

Figure 5

Fiscal crises interconnections

Economics

Geopolitics

Environment

Society

Technology

Source: World Economic Forum 2010

Unemployment: the long shadow of the downturn
Unemployment has risen dramatically over the past
18 months, across all sectors. Unemployment among
OECD member countries alone has increased by 25.5
million since the start of the crisis and some estimates
suggest that globally the increase could total over 50
million in 2010. Jobs are not created as quickly as they
are lost and any protracted period of high unemployment
will have adverse effect on consumption. Moreover,
OECD studies show that a 1% increase in unemployment
increases public debt by up to 3% of GDP over 10 years.

Though the rise may have been sharper in advanced
economies, it should not be forgotten that unemployment
is a global problem and that, even before the global
recession, unemployment rates in North Africa, the
Middle East and sub-Saharan Africa stood at 10.3%,
9.4% and 7.9% respectively in 2008 according to
figures from the International Labour Organization (ILO).
Even in India, with a healthy growth rate, the official
unemployment rate stood at 7.2% in 2008. Population
growth and the economic climate could push the
numbers of poor to above the 1.4 billion estimated

Global Risks 2010 | 15

by the World Bank (World Development Indicators
2009). Poverty is concentrated in sub-Saharan Africa
and South Asia, which are regions most prone to the
effects of climate change, natural catastrophes and
global health issues. This leaves almost one-quarter of
the world’s population in a highly vulnerable position.

unemployed in many regions and they have been
particularly hit by the job losses and poor prospects in
advanced economies. Studies suggest that the effects
of unemployment or poor job opportunities early on in
the working life have consequences for earning power
and development over the rest of an individual’s career.

A cyclical response and structural shift

As debate about necessary reforms continues in the
US and Europe, it should be noted that according to
the International Labour Organization (ILO) only 20%
of the world has what the ILO terms “adequate” social
protection, only 50% of the world has any coverage at
all and in developing countries that figure falls to less
than 10% of their population. While advanced countries
focus on reforming their social security systems, perhaps
this is an opportune moment for a global dialogue on
how to design health and pension systems that are
sustainable and can support growth and development
in all parts of the world.

The sudden rise in jobless figures seen in developed
economies in 2009 was in part cyclical, as a response
to the decline in demand and these jobs should
therefore return, albeit slowly, as demand increases.
However, the crisis also hastened structural changes.
Certain industries, such as the automobile sector, were
already in decline in regions where labour costs made
them uncompetitive. In other industries, airlines or
pharmaceuticals for example, consolidation and new
business models mean an overall decrease in the numbers
employed. The question will be how to compensate
for these structural changes as growth returns.
Unemployment in the Eurozone is expected to reach
11% in 2010. Some countries, such as Germany,
seem to have fared relatively better thus far, through
moves to shorten working hours, rather than cutting
jobs and to maintain people in employment, if only
part-time. Most reports suggest that unemployment
will fall faster in the US than in Europe. The difference
is attributable to the flexibility in US labour markets but,
even with this, the US will be affected by widespread
plant closures and continuing bankruptcies among
small and medium size enterprises (SMEs). One risk
is that this crisis leaves a legacy of underemployment,
where people are constrained to accept part-time
jobs or jobs that do not require their level of skills. US
Department of Labour statistics show that there are
9 million workers in part-time employment who are
seeking full-time jobs. Unemployment can become
entrenched as workers lose skills or find themselves
with the wrong skills to take advantage of new jobs
when they arrive.
Widespread job losses have an immediate and direct
effect on economies, but also on individuals and
societies. One factor, common to both the developed
and developing world, is that unemployment has a
disproportionately large impact on youth. Young
workers under 25 make up the greatest share of the

16 | Global Risks 2010

Migration and unemployment
One of the less prominent risks on the landscape
concerns poor labour and migration policies, and a
lack of cooperation at a global level, which meets
neither the needs of donor or recipient countries.
Though the arrival of immigrants can spark debate in
some recipient countries, global migration flows are
actually not that large. The International Organization
for Migration (IOM) estimates the number of migrants
in the world at 193 million, or approximately 3% of the
global population. In periods of high employment,
migrants are often a welcome source of labour but as
unemployment rises, so do pressures on politicians to
“protect” jobs. As mentioned in the previous chapter
of this report, there is a risk that in response to public
and sometimes populist pressures, governments
introduce measures to curtail immigration. However,
these policies are double-edged. In the short term,
they clearly affect migrants and their home economies
as remittances fall. There can also be unintended
consequences of the policies, resulting in the rise of
illegal migration and black and grey market activity. In
the longer term, if the measures remain in place they can
accentuate problems around skill shortages, which will
no doubt re-emerge once jobs return. Migration policies
need to be long term and cannot work in isolation.
Better dialogue and coordination is needed between
recipient and donor countries. Recommendations

from the Forum’s Global Agenda Council on Economic
Growth and Development highlighted the importance
of migration and suggested a focus on policies such
as encouraging the return of educated diaspora as a
tool for development or making the ability of countries
to attract immigrants a badge of success.
The twin challenge of global imbalances
Sustainable growth in the global economy is inextricably
tied to sustainable fiscal balances across the world.
Large macroeconomic imbalances count among the
contributing causes of the current financial crisis.
A number of advanced economies were, as a whole,
saving less than they were investing. For example,
China's gross savings rate is nearly 60% of national
income, an exceptionally high rate, particularly in
contrast with the low rate of about 12% recorded in
the US. The low national savings rate explains why
the US has become dependent on capital inflows, with
foreigners financing almost one third of US investments
in recent years. These savings gaps, which materialized
in current account deficits, were financed to a large
extent through capital inflows from emerging economies,
predominantly countries in South-East Asia with excess
savings. In the long run, macroeconomic imbalances
must be reduced. This requires a difficult rebalancing
during which emerging economies must boost domestic
spending (which will reduce excess savings), while
advanced economies in turn should boost savings.
At the heart of this rebalancing should be a credible
path towards fiscal stability that balances the obligations
of current and future generations.

Global Risks 2010 | 17

3. Underinvestment in Infrastructure
Figure 6

Underinvestment in infrastructure and interconnected risks

Economics

Geopolitics

Environment

Society

Technology

Source: World Economic Forum 2010

Global Risks 2009 noted the importance of spending
decisions as governments launched fiscal stimulus
packages to boost growth and create jobs. Infrastructure
investment choices are key at any time but they are
particularly critical, if the dual challenge of population
growth and climate change is to be met, in five areas:
agriculture, energy, water, transportation and climate
change adaptation.
The Global Risks Expert Perception Survey 2010
data shows underinvestment in infrastructure as one
of the most highly interconnected risks on the RIM
(see Figure 13, page 33). The strongest links are to
fiscal crises, oil prices and natural catastrophes,
18 | Global Risks 2010

but it also links to health issues, including infectious
diseases as well as chronic diseases, and to food price
volatility. The World Bank has put global infrastructure
investment needs at US$ 35 trillion over the next 20
years. In the US alone, the American Society of Civil
Engineers rated US critical infrastructure as a “D”
(where “A” is the highest grade) in 2009 and estimated
that US$ 2.2 trillion was necessary over the next five
years. The US spends approximately 2.4% of GDP per
annum on infrastructure, compared with approximately
15% of GDP on health. Underinvestment in infrastructure
is not just a risk to existing structures in the developed
world, if it is not addressed it is also a barrier to growth
and development in the developing world as well.

New and existing infrastructure is critical
to resilience
The last decade has seen the rise of the public-private
partnership model for large infrastructure projects,
many of which are needed in countries where the
political and governance environment are far from
ideal or even stable. Traditionally, the state is seen
as the driver of major infrastructure projects, such
as road, rail, energy and water grids. The initial
investment is made by governments, with private
enterprise running the delivery and service aspects
through licensing or other long-term agreements.
However, as discussed earlier in this report, many
governments must manage the critical maintenance
and renewal of existing infrastructure, as well as new,
large-scale projects in energy, transportation and
urbanization, in the face of widening fiscal deficits
and growing debt.
For other countries, including many emerging markets,
the barriers may not be weak fiscal positions but rather
concerns about political stability and governance
structures to protect investments. Many countries
richly endowed with natural resources, such as energy,
metals, or agricultural crops, have become targeted by
other countries for inward infrastructure investments in
return for access to resources. The problem is that
these infrastructure investments can be blinkered and
“resource-centric”, and might not serve the country
as a whole. But this problem must rest largely with
the producer nation’s government, which is ultimately
responsible for creating linkages to a wider plan for
development. Examples of a narrower view of
infrastructure development can be found from South
America to Africa, where villages without running water
and electricity sit next to busy highways ferrying goods
to and from state-of-the-art port facilities. The risk of
local unrest is high, but the greater risk is the depleted
potential for long-term development and greater
economic well-being for the wider population.
To address infrastructure needs with a vision for a
sustainable, resource efficient approach to projects is
one of the challenges of both emerging market and
developed world countries. Given the financial, political,
environmental and even societal risks involved in
infrastructure projects, there is a need to establish
best practices, to share know-how and enabling
technologies, and to find innovative ways to finance
development while managing risks. International
finance and development institutions have long been
working on multistakeholder approaches, but these
efforts will have to be stepped up. One area under
discussion as part of the proposals coming from the
Forum’s Global Agenda Councils is that new models
might be found to encourage large institutional investors,

who have a longer term investment horizon, such as
pension funds or sovereign wealth funds, to invest in
infrastructure projects. As an area linked to so many
risks and one that can ultimately amplify or dampen
the impact of a range of other global risks, the time has
come to step up the dialogue and thinking to achieve
the necessary level of infrastructure investment in an
economically and environmentally sustainable manner.
Agriculture: the infrastructure necessary for
food security and sustainable growth
Despite an increasingly urban global population, 75%
of the world’s poor continue to live in rural areas. As
this report discussed in 2007, food security is driven
by a number of factors but all are highly interlinked
and infrastructure is at the nexus of many of these
factors. A still growing global population that is moving
to a more protein intensive diet engenders not only
greater overall demand for food but also greater
demand for the water and energy needed to produce
and transport that food. Few countries have the
mechanisms in place to manage their future needs in
terms of infrastructure and health planning based on
available water for the population. For example, a 2009
report on water by the Forum6, estimated that by 2030
there will be a 40% shortfall between the amount of
water India requires to meet its own energy and food
production needs and the water available to do so.
If agricultural productivity is to have any chance of
increasing to meet the demands of 9 billion people by
2050, a second Green Revolution will have to happen.
Indeed, in Africa the first green revolution is still to take
place. But there are also huge gains to be made from
investment in better storage and transportation systems,
thus minimizing waste and maximizing the amount of
food reaching consumers. The impact of investment
in these facilities could make a significant contribution
to reducing some of the volatility in food prices. In
addition to storage and transport, two other areas of
infrastructure related to agriculture are key: water and
energy. Agriculture accounts for 70% of the draws on
water and as the effects of climate change mean that
many areas become drier or more prone to extreme
weather, improved water efficiency becomes vital.
Improving water capture and irrigation would be an
investment not only in productivity but in sustainable
resource management. Investment in energy
infrastructure is also a priority in rural areas in developing
countries and must be part of a broader energy strategy.
Farmers can be doubly hit by rising or volatile energy
prices through input and transportation costs, but
energy prices also link to the input side, with gas
prices in particular affecting nitrate-based fertilizers.

6 “The Bubble Is Close to Bursting”, World Economic Forum 2009

www.weforum.org/en/initiatives/water/

Global Risks 2010 | 19

Infrastructure investment alone will not be sufficient, but
it will be a necessary accompaniment to investment in
other areas and to improved market structures at the
national and international level. Challenges in this area
are manifold. Some of the most productive land in the
world is in areas of high instability and where major
infrastructure projects require governments, international
institutions and aid agencies to be innovative in the
way risk is shared if they are to attract the substantial
private investment necessary. Farms in much of the
world are small, insufficiently productive and very
labour intensive. As populations become more urban,
there is a risk that labour and know-how are lost. As
discussed in Global Risks 2009, and mentioned earlier
in this chapter, there is a risk of “land grabbing”, as
nations try to secure their food supply by investing
directly into agricultural land in other countries.
The infrastructure necessary to support sustainable
agricultural production will not just pay off in terms of
providing food to the more than 1 billion people who went
hungry in 2009, but it will also help drive development
in rural areas. The UN Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) and World Food Programme predict that the food
crisis of 2008, which led to riots and political turmoil in
several countries, will be repeated over the coming
decades. What is clear is that current levels of investment
in agriculture are not enough to drive the 70% increase
in food production necessary to feed an expected
population of 9.1 billion by 2050. During the last period
of fiscal crises in the 1980s and 1990s, agriculture
suffered from reduced investment that was never
restored. Poor returns, uncertainty and distorting
subsidies made investment less profitable. In the face
of rising unemployment and reduced consumer spending
in the advanced economies and a record number of
people suffering from hunger globally, governments
and international institutions now need to think long
term, and create the mechanisms and environment to
encourage investment in infrastructure and leverage
that investment for growth and stability.

20 | Global Risks 2010

Infrastructure and energy security
While the recession caused global energy use to fall in
2009 for the first time since 1981, the long-term trend
for energy consumption is still upwards. The main
demand will continue to be for fossil fuels. The demand
for oil will be primarily driven by the transport sector.
Coal and gas will be the main fuels needed to meet
the growing demand for electricity, and most of that
demand will be in China, developing Asian countries
and the Middle East.
As energy demand fell over 2009, so did energy
investment because of the tighter credit environment.
The International Energy Agency (IEA) estimates that
investments in oil and gas projects were cut by 19%
from 2008 to 2009. Investment in renewables fell even
more. Without government fiscal packages, investment
in renewables would have fallen by 30% but even
with them, they fell 20%. Underinvestment in energy
infrastructure touches on a number of key themes of
this report (see the box on energy security page 21).
The demand for energy will rise as the global population
grows and with it consumption. Current energy policies,
based on fossil fuels, look increasingly untenable
given what they would produce in terms of CO2 and
greenhouse gas concentrations. Energy security has
long been used to describe the need for a stable and
guaranteed supply: in the 21st century it may need to
be redefined as meaning stable, guaranteed and
carbon neutral.
The links to the financial crisis and to fiscal crises
also have a direct impact on underinvestment in
energy infrastructure. First, a lag in investment may
mean that as demand returns there will be a shortfall
in capacity that could lead to supply constraints in the
medium term, thus oil price spikes and higher price
volatility. Any major disruption to supply or rise in prices
over the next years could slow the recovery and set
back growth. Second, a huge amount of energy
infrastructure investment, estimated at almost half of the
total US$ 1.1 trillion per annum by the IEA, is needed
to meet the rapidly rising demand from developing
countries. Rural areas in Africa, India and other parts of
Asia are in particular need of reliable energy production
and supply to support their development. Third, aside
from the enormous and pressing need for public and
private finance for energy infrastructure, the over-arching
need is for this money to be spent strategically. The
stimulus packages proposed by several governments
targeted investment into renewable energy to reduce
long-term dependency on fossil fuels but equally to
reduce CO2 emissions. Low-carbon investments,
investments in more energy efficient infrastructure and
in carbon capture and storage will all be part of the
arsenal needed to mitigate climate change.

Energy security and investment: Walking the tightrope between national policy
imperatives and economics
Energy companies faced significant challenges as a result of the global economic slowdown in 2009, many of
which will play out in 2010 and beyond. With demand growth uncertain, credit constrained and balance sheets
stretched, there was a tendency for companies to prioritize short-term consolidation over longer term investment
needs. In other words, the overall shortage of capital and decisions to pay off debt resulted in the postponement
of major infrastructure outlays. It also meant a reluctance to exploit reserves that were economically non-viable at
current oil prices, and a withdrawal from renewables portfolios with weaker or less reliable economics.
Impact on energy security 2010-2015
Long lead times in the sector mean that decisions made now could have a number of negative consequences
across the different dimensions of global energy security. These include:
• Slower expansion of upstream activities and supply side constraints. An increasing percentage of oil
concessions will be won by well-capitalized national oil companies. In addition, should there be a swift rebound
in demand pressure on existing transportation infrastructure could lead to a tightening gas supply market.
• Sudden leaps in energy prices. Inevitably a high proportion of the likely rises will be passed on to
consumers, domestic and business alike.
• The failure of energy infrastructure to meet demand. Investment delays will increase the likelihood of
reliability issues with ageing plants, grids and networks in developed countries. Much-needed projects in
developing countries, which will bring about greater access to energy resources, will not be initiated.
• Weaker performance in emissions reduction programmes. Delays in upgrading generation assets in
developed countries will also result in an inability to achieve CO2 efficiencies. Any slowdown on renewables
investments will mean that certain countries/regions will fail to meet ambitious uptake targets and goals for
increasing supply diversity.
• Resource nationalization. International access to new energy sources might be restricted.
What governments can do
The energy sector stimulus packages announced in 2009 (see Figure 7 below) are an important contribution to
the situation, despite the relatively low levels of funds distributed, only 15% to date, and concern in some
quarters that the sums involved are not sufficient to bring about a sustainable and reliable energy future. Given
the long-term nature of the industry, companies considering major strategic commitments need an enduring
policy framework with appropriate parameters and incentives that can bring some predictability to their planning.
This means clear direction at the international level on climate policy and trade issues, and robust long-term
strategies from national governments regarding infrastructure renewal to enhance security of supply, reliability
and the reduction of carbon emissions.
Figure 7

Key stimulus packages for the energy sector, 2009-2011

Country/region

Amount

Key foci

US
China
Japan
South Korea
Spain
Germany
Australia
UK
France

US$ 66.6 billion
US$ 46.8 billion
US$ 8.0 billion
US$ 7.7 billion
US$ 7.6 billion
US$ 3.7 billion
US$ 3.4 billion
US$ 2.7 billion
US$ 2.4 billion

• Clean energy generation
• Energy efficiency
• Grid development

Source: New Energy Finance (2009)

What energy companies can do
To position themselves competitively for the next few years, energy companies need to address a number of
issues in their planning. They should consider how best to adjust the mix of assets, businesses or sources of
supply in ways that both reduce exposure to price volatility and political instability, and enhance their capacity to
respond to toughening policy requirements. In doing so, they should establish how to optimize their strategic
investment capacity on a risk-return basis and ensure that their approach to debt/leverage reduction does not
significantly impair their ability to achieve strategic growth.
Global Risks 2010 | 21

Infrastructure and climate change adaptation
Despite declining budget resources, and in addition
to the investment needed in the area of energy,
governments must urgently take steps to address the
unavoidable consequences of climate change. Denser
urban development in coastal areas (15 of the world’s
20 megacities are coastal), lax planning that allowed
property development on natural flood plains or higher
dependency on crops in increasingly drought-exposed
areas are just some examples of the type of risks that
cannot be avoided but where adaptation strategies can
be adopted. But which strategies? The Economics of
Climate Adaptation (ECA) Working Group7 has created a
framework for evaluating the alternatives that governments
might consider. The ECA Working Group was formed to
explore how countries can become economically more
resilient in the face of climate change. By estimating a
location’s total climate risk – calculated by combining
existing climate risks, climate change and the value of
future economic development – and using a cost-benefit
analysis to create a list of location-specific measures
to adapt to the identified risk, the working group was
able to evaluate current and potential costs of climate
Figure 8

change and how to respond to them. A scenario-based
approach was used to manage the level of uncertainty
inherent in judging future climate patterns and assessing
different conditions in which a community would need
to respond.
This approach was applied to eight regions in both
developed and developing countries (China, India,
Samoa, Guyana, United States, Mali, United Kingdom
and Tanzania) representing a wide range of climate
hazards, economic implications and development
stages. The overall findings, in the ECA report Shaping
Climate-Resilient Development, showed that easily
identifiable and cost-effective measures – such as
improved drainage, sea barriers and improved building
regulations, among many others – could reduce potential
economic losses from climate change. Indeed, most
could deliver economic benefits that far outweigh their
costs, as adaptation measures on average cost less
than 50% of the economic loss avoided. This confirmed
the link between using a risk management approach
to adapting to climate change and the broader goal of
supporting long-term regional economic development.

Cost Effective Measures for Climate Change Adaptation

1 Based upon select regions analyzed within the countries (e.g., Mopti, Mali, Georgetown, Guyana Hull, UK, North and
Northeast China; Maharashtra, India; Central regions of Tanzania; Southeast Florida, U.S.)
2 Based upon moderate scenario data and analysis
Source: The Economics of Climate Change Working Group, 2009

7 The Economics of Climate Change Adaptation Working Group is a partnership between the Global Environmental Facility, McKinsey & Company, SwissRe,
the Rockefeller Foundation, ClimateWorks Foundation and the European Commission, and Standard Chartered Bank. www.swissre.com/climatechange

22 | Global Risks 2010

Addressing systemic risk in critical infrastructure
As services provided by critical infrastructure become ever more embedded in wider systems, it becomes
increasingly important to maintain their integrity and resilience. For example, financial systems and emergency
services are highly dependent on telecommunication operations, which are highly reliant on electricity. And, even
within a given industry, a critical network is made of multiple interdependent pieces which often rely on the
robustness of the weakest link in the network. Companies and governments need to be aware of these
interconnections when they build and manage these systems.
Some recent examples and possible scenarios
The large-scale August 2003 power failures in the north-east of the US and in Canada, which deprived more
than 50 million North Americans of electricity, was triggered by the failure of a utility in Ohio. A disease originating
in one region of the globe can readily spread to other areas through transportation networks, as was the case
with the rapid spread of SARS in 2003 or with swine flu in 2009. The meltdown of a nuclear reactor in one
country can lead to massive radioactive contamination hundreds of miles away, as illustrated by the Chernobyl
nuclear plant disaster in 1986. Looking ahead, a major terrorist attack that closed a port such as Rotterdam,
Hong Kong or Los Angeles for weeks would have severe economic consequences on world trade because it
would inflict major disruptions in complex just-in-time supply chains that comprise the global economy.
Private efficiency, public vulnerability
These examples illustrate the existence of important interdependencies between people and organizations,
hundreds if not thousands of miles apart, through the malfunctioning of technical infrastructure that we use and
depend upon today. If the organization is a firm, there is a need to balance the additional private costs to
operate more safely that might negatively affect the firm’s bottom line with the benefits of reduced global risks;
that is the trade-off between private efficiency and public vulnerability. The reluctance of private firms to
undertake these measures unless they know others have followed suit is a source of market failure.
Looking for solutions
A challenge for policy-makers and business leaders is to provide the right regulations or incentives to invest
adequately in security.
• Third party inspections and well-enforced regulations might be necessary to ensure that infrastructure is
well designed and maintained over time. In countries where the large majority of infrastructure is operated by
the private sector, regulations might be inspired by industry best practices since most of the knowledge and
resources will be found there.
• Building global coordination and reaction capacity. Since these risks arise within interdependent
networks, effective solutions usually demand looking beyond an individual firm to its operating units. These
solutions might involve well-enforced regulations or coordinating efforts across divisions in a firm, across a
supply chain, across operators of a given type of infrastructure, and across countries in the form of treaties or
global compacts. Sometimes top decision-makers in the public and private sectors can join forces to decrease
collective risk: this was done successfully under the leadership of research institutions serving as a neutral
party in the aftermath of the anthrax crisis in 2001 through the development of a global reaction capacity
platform between postal operators of over 20 countries. The same framework could now be applied to many
other critical services.
• Thinking long-term return on investment. A major challenge with security of critical services is the tendency
to be myopic and to seek short-term reward. Energy companies are now considering proposals to encourage
consumers and businesses to invest in more efficient energy efficient measures by incurring the upfront costs,
which will be paid back over time by the user of the appliance through the savings they achieve in lower electricity
bills. The market for building brand new infrastructure and replacing ageing ones is huge in Asia, Africa, Europe
and the Americas. Investment decisions made today will thus have a determinant impact for years to come.
There is an opportunity here to make critical infrastructure not only more secure, but also greener.

Global Risks 2010 | 23

4. Chronic Diseases
Figure 9

Chronic diseases and interconnected risks

Economics

Geopolitics

Environment

Society

Technology

Source: World Economic Forum 2010

Though the worldwide spread of H1N1 brought the
implications of a global pandemic to the fore again,
another global health risk unfortunately illustrates the
need to address ongoing slow failures. As both the
Global Risks Landscape and the RIM show, chronic
diseases (or non-communicable diseases (NCD)),
including: heart disease, stroke, diabetes, some
chronic lung conditions and preventable cancers) are
strongly connected to a number of other global risks:
fiscal crises; underinvestment in infrastructure; food,
water and energy security. The cost of treating chronic
diseases has risen globally, as have associated rates
of morbidity and mortality, driven by demographic
changes and dietary shifts, causing some to call it a
“silent” pandemic.
24 | Global Risks 2010

Though linked to the rise in obesity associated with
developed nations, low- and middle-income countries
account for 80% of all deaths from chronic diseases
globally. These conditions are the leading cause of
death worldwide with the exception of sub-Saharan
Africa and, unfortunately, chronic disease mortalities
will overtake those of infectious diseases in that region
as well by 2030. Out of the 35 million people who
died from chronic diseases in 2005, one-half were
under 70 and one-half were women. Over the next
decade, if not addressed effectively, chronic diseases
will increase by 27% in Africa, 25% in the Middle East
and 21% in Asia and Pacific, accounting for 75% of all
deaths globally.

A problem neither the developed nor the
developing world can afford
Declining development assistance has already led to
a significant reduction of public spending on health in
many countries. When funds are limited, governments
tend to focus on basic health services, in line with the
United Nation’s Millennium Development Goals (MDGs),
at the expense of the prevention and treatment of
chronic diseases. Most developing countries, with
the exception of several sub-Saharan African nations,
will experience a historic shift over the next decades.
Deaths from infectious diseases; maternal and perinatal
conditions; and nutritional deficiencies combined are
projected to decline by 3% over the next 10 years.
However, over the same period, deaths due to chronic
diseases are projected to increase by 71%. In countries
plagued by poverty and social divides, failure to protect
populations from basic and preventable health risks
brakes economic development and threatens social
well-being and stability. The fact that chronic diseases
are not part of the mainstream global health and
development agenda and that these are outside of the
remit of the time-bound, outcome-based targets of
the MDGs shows that more long-term and integrated
planning is needed to address health risks.
Chronic diseases and food security: tackling
malnutrition and poor nutrition holistically
As the crisis of 2008 showed, food price spikes
and volatility affect consumption patterns of poor
populations rapidly and can result in increased
exposure to NCD risk. Poorer populations can suffer
from malnutrition and can also suffer disproportionately
from poor nutrition linked to chronic diseases. Climate
change in combination with water and energy scarcity
further adversely affect food security, creating a vicious
cycle. Although poverty has traditionally been associated
with underweight because of poor diet, research has
revealed a paradox in the US, which is unfortunately
now also being observed in developing countries: low
income and obesity can coexist in the same population.
The UN Food and Agriculture Organization and World
Food Programme are starting to look at this problem.
Future policies for nations with poor and low-income
populations who are most exposed to food price volatility
and shortages must aim not only to address basic food
needs but should also look at the quality of nutrition,
embedding health in food security discussions.
Spending less for more
Healthcare spending in many developed economies
already represents a huge fiscal burden. With sharply
deteriorating fiscal positions, higher unemployment
and ageing populations, developed economies will feel
the costs and social impact of chronic diseases even
more over the coming years. Total health spending in the

US accounts for 15% of GDP. A third of this spending
on health is for obesity-related chronic diseases. In
other developed countries, this figure is between 2%
and 3.5%. As pressures on public finances and health
insurance costs mount, chronic disease risks exemplify
how much more cost effective it would be for health
institutions, governments and businesses to focus on
prevention rather than treatment. Evidence suggests
that a modest reduction in the prevalence of certain
chronic disease risk factors, such as tobacco and
alcohol consumption, and healthier diets, could result in
substantial health gains and cost savings. For instance,
a Norwegian study estimated that savings of US$ 188
million could be made by lowering the population blood
pressure level by a 2 mm Hg reduction in salt intake.
A Canadian study estimated that a 10% reduction in
the prevalence of physical inactivity could reduce
direct healthcare expenditures by Can$ 150 million
(approximately US$ 124 million) in a year.
Information and innovation are key to prevention
In several countries, the application of existing
knowledge has led to major improvements in the
life expectancy and quality of life of middle aged and
older people. For example, through campaigns to
raise awareness and better education of prevention,
heart disease death rates have fallen by up to 70% in
the last three decades in Australia, Canada, the United
Kingdom and the United States. Middle-income
countries, such as Poland, have also been able to
make substantial improvements in recent years by
informing the population of the benefits of good diet
and exercise. From 1970 to 2000, the World Health
Organization has estimated that 14 million cardiovascular
disease deaths were averted in the United States alone.
The United Kingdom saved 3 million lives during the
same period. Given the inexorable rise in health costs
as populations age, governments need to rethink their
health systems to make them more effective. New
models of health financing, mixing public and individual
contributions, will need to create incentives for greater
emphasis on prevention, and this will undoubtedly go
far beyond the traditional approach to health systems
in both the developed and developing world.
The risk for business
One-half of those who die from chronic diseases are
in their productive years and so the social costs and
economic consequences in terms of lost productivity
are considerable. This fact, coupled with rising
healthcare costs to employers, has made the private
sector aware of this problem, in particular because
many of these costs are preventable. In the US, the
avoidable indirect impact of chronic diseases, due for
example to productivity losses, is four times as high
as the direct costs of healthcare coverage.

Global Risks 2010 | 25

The WHO estimates that between 2005 and 2015
income loss could rise to as much as US$ 558 billion
in China, US$ 237 billion in India, US$ 303 million in
Russia and US$ 33 billion in the United Kingdom.
Brazil, Russia, India and China currently lose more
than 20 million productive life-years annually to chronic
diseases, and that number is expected to grow 65%
by 2030. The losses in productivity associated with
those diseases, through disability, unplanned absences
and increased accidents, are as much as 400% more
than the cost of treatment. It is now well established
that workable solutions exist to prevent 40-50% of
these diseases and their negative impact on business
and the economy at large in both developed and
developing countries.
The private sector can contribute significantly to the
fight against NCDs by informing and supporting
actions to tackle the lifestyle-related risks, tobacco
and alcohol use, unhealthy diet and lack of physical
activity among employees and customers.

Not only is it important for good global citizenship but
there is also a strong business case. By focusing on
responsible food marketing to children, reducing
trans-fatty acids and salt, and providing simple, clear
and consistent food labels, significant gains can be
achieved at the population level. The WHO has recently
announced the “Chan Commitments”, a groundbreaking
set of voluntary commitments by nine of the largest food
and beverage manufacturers to shift to healthier options.
The democratization of health information, growth in
self-care technology, increased level of social interaction
through social media and liberation of the Web through
mobile platforms are shifting worldwide attitudes and
can support person-centred health. Mobilization of
social forces and people outside of health systems is
critical as it is clear that chronic diseases are affecting
social and economic capital globally.

Chronic Diseases: Mitigating measures recommended by the Global Agenda
Council of the World Economic Forum on Chronic Diseases
Global support for international governance
• The World Health Organization, as the lead technical agency in health, must garner necessary resources and
cross-sector political will to implement the Global Action Plan for Non Communicable Diseases, 2008-2015.
It must work in partnership with all relevant multilateral and bilateral agencies to provide coordinated and
consolidated guidance to implement plans, policies and programmes.
• The 22 development partners, who presently spend less than 1% of the US$ 22 billion on chronic diseases, must
now be more proactive in their support of individual country requests for assistance to address chronic diseases.
• Ongoing work on negotiated agreements for the reduction of salt in processed food and the work of the
Conference of Parties in giving shape to the terms of the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control and the
forthcoming WHO Alcohol Strategy should be supported by the development partners, countries and industry.
National and global incentives
• Countries should mount a serious public policy response to this threat. Measures should be instituted to
support the control of tobacco and alcohol use, and to provide strong incentives for the production and
availability of healthy foods (e.g., shift towards healthy agriculture policies).
• The food industry should work collaboratively towards reshaping the industry to introduce new products with
better nutritional value and make healthy options, affordable and available. They should focus on responsible
food marketing to children, reducing trans-fatty acids and salt and provide simple, clear and consistent food
labels. Incentives at national and global levels to support this shifting should be developed simultaneously.
• Stimuli and incentives for employers from private and public sectors should be put in place to support further
implementation of workplace health.
• Countries must prepare for changing patterns in the volume and composition of service delivery and demands
for patient education and long-term pharmaceutical use in view of the changed disease trends.
A yardstick to measure progress
• A global mechanism should be developed to map and track chronic diseases, set benchmarks and track
trends of solution implementation and its impact on disease burden. A “health and well-being footprint”
could serve as yardstick to indicate progress that governments, public and private sector producers and
service providers, and individuals achieve on health. Such measurement should be embedded as well as part
of the Millennium Development Goals review process.

26 | Global Risks 2010

5. Risks to Keep on the Radar
This section considers a selection of risks that might not
feature prominently on the Global Risks Landscape but
that are highly interconnected and reflect the potential
for systemic risks and failures. The themes of this
year’s report also links the need for better governance
and, in particular, institutions and mechanisms to
share information and for long-term thinking as to their
impact. These are not emerging risks but all demand
greater attention of leaders and greater collaboration
on solutions.
To highlight the need to integrate these risks more into
thinking on systemic threats and vulnerabilities, they are
examined through the lens of the Global Risk Network’s
“5i” framework. The 5i framework refers to insight,
information, incentives, investment and institutions.
Looking at each of these risks, using this simple
approach, can help assess risks and the governance
and other gaps that need to be addressed to better
manage them in a collective and effective manner.

Transnational crime and corruption:
endemic risks
The economic and social costs of transnational
crime and corruption
If there is one area of global risk that epitomizes
how the power of globalization can be misused, it
is transnational crime and corruption. Some experts
estimate that global organized crime and illicit trade
accounts for 10% of global GDP. Transnational crime
and corruption is highly interconnected with many of
the global risks across the spectrum, ranging from
geopolitical risks such as terrorism, instability in
Afghanistan and nuclear proliferation, to biodiversity
loss, and risks to critical information infrastructure.
In the health sector, counterfeited drugs represent
almost 10% of the worldwide pharmaceuticals
market, equivalent to US$ 35 billion in revenues,
causing millions of deaths each year.
Global business exposure
World Bank estimates from 2006 show that over US$
1 trillion is paid in bribes each year, acting like a direct
tax on doing business while severely undermining
legitimate competition and innovation. Meanwhile, many
studies show that every form of illicit trade is linked to
the legitimate economy. Both human trafficking and
forced labour, for instance, have widely penetrated
the legitimate economy. Through their increasingly
complex supply chains and vast distribution networks,
corporations are more exposed to problems such as
counterfeiting, intellectual property infringement and
corruption at all levels. Businesses need to engage
with other stakeholders, if they are to beat what is
fast becoming their biggest competitor, as well as
better educate their customers. As value chains

lengthen and become more complex, multinational
corporations need information and must have better
oversight of who they are linked to further up and
down the chain.
Partnering Against Corruption
The World Economic Forum’s Partnering Against
Corruption Initiative (PACI) created a multinational task
force of participating companies from all over the world,
adopting benchmark “Business Principles” that address
ethical conduct regarding bribes, facilitation payments,
political and charitable contributions, as well as gifts
and sponsorships. Since its formation in 2003, more
than 140 companies from all industry sectors have
signed on to the PACI and, in so doing, they have
agreed to maintain a zero-tolerance policy towards
bribery and corruption and to implement a broad-based
anti-corruption programme to guide the behaviour of
their employees.
The Global Risks 5i Framework applied to
transnational crime and corruption
Insight: Crime and corruption thrive on the increasing
complexity and opacity of supply chains and global
markets. While various actors and institutions have
visibility into segments of the chain, most often they lack
the complete overview of the chain and interactions
within it. Forward-looking risk management must
therefore identify these interlinkages and account for
the entire sequence of exchanges from the source to
the distribution to end customers, identifying the
trading routes and facilitators connecting each step.
Information: More information needs to be
systematically shared among international institutions
and national agencies and bodies to maintain oversight
and match transactions with the instigators and
intermediaries involved. Improving traceability and
transparency would help both business and endconsumers make informed decisions. The UN Convention
against Corruption, which has been signed by 140
countries and ratified by 136, provides mechanisms for
information sharing and reporting, which could be used to
engage leaders in proactive measures against corruption.
Incentives: Crime and corruption prosper whenever
the expected returns of proceeds far exceed any real
or perceived barriers to abide by the stipulated rules
and regulations. Minimum and guaranteed wages
could reduce some of the incentives for crime and
corruption in many countries, while lower expected
returns for exchanged counterfeit or other illegal goods
coupled with enforced transnational regulation would
decrease incentives to enter the black market.

Global Risks 2010 | 27

Investment: Efforts to restructure and improve both
national and global collaboration efforts on crime and
corruption will call for resources to improve the
sharing of information, tracking and connecting
agencies with different areas of responsibility, including
customs agencies, law enforcement organs, as well
as industry and trade agencies. Greater funding is
required for existing measures to combat corruption,
such as country visits with peer reviewers from other
countries and improved reporting.
Institutions: The rise of transnational crime and
corruption illustrates a major governance gap and the
need to improve global oversight and regulation.
Figure 10

Nation states have difficulty apprehending criminals
that operate out of their jurisdiction, while excessive
attention and resources are often applied to certain
highly visible illegal activities, ignoring the larger
picture and connections among many forms of illicit
activity. The role of current international organizations
is often limited by jurisdiction as well as the
unwillingness of their members to share information
and collaborate on a global basis. Combating illicit
trade calls for stronger global focus on the
provenance, trading routes, facilitators and means of
distribution to end customers. Such oversight
architecture of the future must include an element
that transcends national borders and ensures broad
representation in rule making with agreed and rapid

Transnational crime and corruption and interconnected risks

Economics
Source: World Economic Forum 2010

28 | Global Risks 2010

Geopolitics

Environment

Society

Technology

procedures for systematic enforcement. In all of these
areas, a driving factor for the success of institutional
measures will be political will and action at national
level and the active engagement of existing and
emerging business efforts to mitigate these risks.

Biodiversity loss: the systemic
implications of ecosystem risk
Rules governing biodiversity and ecosystems and their
services (i.e. the benefits people receive such as food,
freshwater, timber, protection from natural hazards,
erosion pharmaceutical ingredients and recreation) have
been largely excluded from global decision-making
processes. As a result, approximately 60% of the
earth’s recognized ecosystem services have been
degraded in the last 50 years. Since 1900, over 50%
of wetlands has been lost; the global forest area has
shrunk by 40% over the past 300 years; and by some
estimates the rate of species extinction is thought to be
up to 1,000 times more rapid than the natural rate of
extinction. Annual economic losses due to deforestation
and land degradation alone were estimated at US$ 2
to US$ 4.5 trillion, the equivalent of between 3.3% and
7.5% of global GDP in 20088.
The consequences of these ongoing losses will not
only affect businesses dealing directly with natural
resources, but will also touch the supply chains and
growth objectives of most industry sectors in the
developed and developing world. Through their natural
carbon sequestration and storage function, forests
can mitigate against the effects of climate change.
Biodiversity and ecosystems services are inextricably
linked with freshwater provision, sustainable agricultural
production and climate. They are also linked to food
security, migration and political stability, as the habitats
and livelihoods of some of the world’s poorest populations
are directly affected by biodiversity loss. The foreseeable
path of population growth and consumption trends bode
ill for biodiversity. Land and the fauna and flora that live
on it are under threat from more intensive agricultural
needs, from residential and commercial development,
waste and pollutants, and from climate change.
Costing the earth: pricing biodiversity loss
As with many areas of systemic risk, the complexity
of the interconnections renders it difficult to get a full
picture of the costs and implications for biodiversity. The
Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity, or TEEB,
report, is a major project to address this problem. It is
a comprehensive effort to design and present metrics
that account for natural capital and to give them credibility
through consensus and standardization. From this basis,
TEEB focuses on the cost of inaction weighed against
the cost-benefit of investments in protection and

adaptation. The interim report, released in May 2008,
already highlighted some of the costs of inaction.
In 2007, the collapse of bee colonies was calculated to
have cost US agricultural producers US$ 15 billion9.
The effects of climate change are putting coral reef
systems in danger of reaching a tipping point: if they
disappear, they take with them around US$ 152 billion
of annual economic revenues10. On a more positive
note, research also shows that investment in ecological
infrastructure is not only cost-effective when compared
with man-made alternatives (if available), but also
essential for effective climate change adaptation and
mitigation strategies.
The business impact of biodiversity loss
In conjunction with the World Economic
Forum’s Global Agenda Council on Ecosystems
and Biodiversity and PricewaterhouseCoopers,
the Global Risk Network has produced a short
briefing on this topic: copies and an online
version can be found at:
www.weforum.org/en/initiatives/globalrisk/index.
htm
The Global Risks 5i Framework applied to
biodiversity loss
Insight: While the links between population growth,
climate change and energy are understood, biodiversity
loss has been seen as a “local” issue. There is a need
to raise awareness of the systemic nature of biodiversity
loss for it to be an integral part of policy-making and
business strategy. The United Nation’s sponsored
“Year of Biodiversity” in 2010 will increase media and
public understanding, but decision-makers should
already include it in their thinking.
Information: The Economics of Ecosystems and
Biodiversity is already influencing policy and economic
agendas with the release of a Climate Issues Update
and a report for policy-makers in the autumn of 2009.
In the summer of 2010, TEEB will release a report aimed
specifically at the business sector. These reports will
help address information gaps, improve measurability
and, it is hoped, lead the way for more information
sharing on this risk and its linkages to other risks.
Incentives: Building an effective baseline through
cost-benefit analysis will support the creation of better
policies and trade and finance mechanisms that will
encourage private sector investment in “greener”
technologies, industry methods and product design
and manufacture.

8, 9, 10 all figures from “The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity (TEEB)”, Interim Report 2008: www.teebweb.org

Global Risks 2010 | 29

Investment: As discussed in earlier sections,
infrastructure investment choices could play a
determining role in the prevention and/or management
of a series of risks. Private capital must be a part of
the solution, together with public policy reforms and
public investment, to ensure that biodiversity
conservation and restoration is profitable.

Figure 11

Institutions: Though only covering one aspect of
ecoservices, the REDD+ (Reducing Emissions from
Deforestation and Forest Degradation) initiative, which
introduces the concept of payments for ecosystem
services to link incentives and funding could serve as
an example to design future governance mechanisms
necessary for other ecosystem services and the
accelerating threats to biological diversity.

Biodiversity loss and interconnected risks

Economics
Source: World Economic Forum 2010

30 | Global Risks 2010

Geopolitics

Environment

Society

Technology

Critical information systems
and cybervulnerability
Modern industrial societies are highly dependent on
a limited number of utilities that provide electricity,
water, oil and gas. In the past, the information
systems controlling the infrastructure underlying
these utilities typically consisted of closed, completely
private networks managed from a single control centre,
with only limited attention given to authentication or
encryption issues. These proprietary networks,
however, were expensive to run while the open,
Internet Protocol-based networking standards offered
substantial cost-saving prospects, which led engineers
to connect the control systems to the Internet across
utilities and other industry sectors around the globe
over the last decade. With the emergence of cloud
computing, a new era of complexity and risk is opening
up. By its very nature, cloud computing will make
risks more diffuse and, thus, their management more
difficult. Cloud computing is a new system, but it will
link to numerous existing, critical systems. In many
ways it could be comparable to the financial system,
global but with relatively little international oversight, and
critical to the functioning of economies and societies.
Cloud computing can bring many opportunities but in
the absence of adapted models of governance and
regulation it could also bring a new degree of
vulnerability and systemic risk.
The convergence of closed and open industrial
control systems, however, has created systemic
vulnerabilities that are still very much off the radar,
judging from the outcome of the Global Risks
Perception Survey 2010, which revealed that most
experts perceive the risk of a potential breakdown of
“Critical Information Infrastructure” (CII), as well as of
data fraud/loss, as comparatively low – both in terms
of likelihood and severity. Moreover, these two risks
were assessed as being among the least interconnected
risks, which is somewhat surprising given that IT systems
increasingly represent the foundation of practically
every service, transaction, communication and
exchange required for the steady functioning of the
global economy, security and individual well-being.
The increasing complexity and rapid development
of dynamic systems and networks, the sophistication
of changing threats and the presence of intrinsic
vulnerabilities present demanding challenges to the
information society. As network systems grow larger
and ever more interconnected, the risk includes large
system failures due to human error or lack of effective
governance of digital assets. Technological, societal
and economic incentives therefore need to become
aligned to reduce the rapidly increasing risks of
cybercrime, data fraud/loss, and CII system failure.

This is particularly important at a time when a serious
incident could have a severe impact and as
technological systems represent a decisive factor
for growth and development.
Confidence and security in critical information and
communication systems are vital for building an
inclusive, secure and global information society, and
a shift in the way we think about data is urgently
needed. Countries need to start the dialogue on
global cybersecurity and stability by addressing
international cooperation. Above all, governments
and businesses need to recognize the extent to
which information and communications technology
(ICT) is inextricably interlinked with other complex
systems, from finance and power generation to
communications and safety controls.
The Global Risks 5i Framework applied to
cyber risk
Insight: As the Internet and CII move from 1.0 to 2.0
and beyond, more content from multiple and varied
sources will be housed together on the customer or
end-user side, creating a highly complex environment
for security governance and protection. The degree to
which ICT systems are increasingly embedded in vital
systems and services, from finance to transportation
and energy, heightens the level of systemic risk and
the potential for a cascade of failures with severe
economic and social impact. Greater analysis and
understanding is needed about potential weak links
and possible mitigation strategies.
Information: Increasingly complex supply chains
have led to a situation where the intellectual property
developers and owners, software platform vendors,
network operators and application vendors all end up
trying to offload the risks and liabilities on each other,
while the end-users have little power, knowledge or
information over the risk to which they are exposing
themselves. This has to be countered by better
education and increased awareness of existing and
emerging information technology-related risks among
all stakeholders. Policy-makers, in particular should
consider how cyber risks should be factored into other
issues, such as energy security, communication and
power networks, including operational continuity at
corporate, community and national level.
Incentives: As new and existing technologies are
applied to critical systems, ranging from smart grids to
cloud computing, the appropriate regulatory frameworks
and incentives have to be implemented to ensure that
the required security technologies are integrated from
the outset, rather than as an afterthought.

Global Risks 2010 | 31

Investment: The infrastructure investments underlying
emerging technologies need to be secure by default –
not as an option. Furthermore, providing for a rapid,
effective, transnational law enforcement mechanism
will require resource commitments by both the public
and private sectors, as will the sharing and compiling
of threat and incident information among government
and industry entities.
Institutions: Institutional prevention and preparedness
should include a global repository of malware and
security breach notification. A central clearinghouse
Figure 12

would help ensure that all reported breaches can
be located by the press, investors, researchers and
sector regulators, with future laws/guidelines setting
minimum standards for notification. Such a framework
of universally accepted rules and standards is required
to provide a globally accepted definition of a cybercrime
and to criminalize offences. At the moment, a patchwork
of national legislations prevents effective tracking,
tracing and prosecution of criminals who operate globally,
while effective security-oriented partnerships between
government and industry have been difficult to establish.

Critical Information Infrastructure breakdown and interconnected risks

Economics
Source: World Economic Forum 2010

32 | Global Risks 2010

Geopolitics

Environment

Society

Technology

6. Managing Global Risks: Understanding
Systemic Vulnerabilities

Figure 13

Risks Interconnection Map (RIM) 2010
Iraq
Israel – Palestine
Iran
Afghanistan instability
Nuclear proliferation
International terrorism
Slowing Chinese economy (<6%)
Major fall in the US$

North Korea
Oil price spikes

Asset price collapse
Transnational crime and corruption
Retrenchment from globalization (emerging)
Fiscal crises

Retrenchment from globalization (developed)
Burden of regulation

Global governance gaps

Data fraud / loss

Food price volatility

Liability regimes

Droughts and desertification
Water scarcity

CII breakdown

Underinvestment in infrastructure
Migration

NatCat: Earthquake

Biodiversity loss
Extreme weather

Pandemics
Chronic disease

NatCat: Coastal flooding
NatCat: Inland flooding

Infectious disease

Air pollution

NatCat: Cyclone

Nanoparticle toxicity

Likelihood (%)

Severity (Billion US$)

Domain
Economics

1

5

10

20

10

50

250

Geopolitics

Environment

Society

Technology

1000

Source: World Economic Forum 2010

Developing a holistic approach to risk
management at country level
The financial crisis of 2008 and ensuing global recession
in 2009 served as a further reminder that countries need
to establish integrated approaches to risk management.
Instead of focusing on company-level risks alone,
governments are taking steps towards establishing
bodies that would monitor systemic risks to avoid a
reoccurrence of the crisis. Adopting such an integrated
approach to risk management, including beyond
economic and financial threats, could take it to the
next level. Governments could coordinate their agencies
with a prioritized national risk landscape and liaise
with counterparts abroad in a more systematic and
proactive manner.

The concept of the Country Risk Officer (CRO) was
introduced in Global Risks 2007 and elaborated in
the subsequent editions of the publication. Given the
multiplicity of risks that a country faces, from natural
catastrophes or pandemic scares to terrorist attacks,
there is a strong case to be made for the creation of
a single point of contact and coordination for the
responses to such risk events. The role, which could be
performed by an individual or a committee, would also be
responsible for analysing and quantifying risks, prioritizing
mitigation measures and implementing programmes to
adapt to the threats that these risks present.

Global Risks 2010 | 33

Recent events have proven why a country should have
overview of the risks it faces not only within its borders
but also at the international level. Here too, a country risk
officer would be in a position to liaise with colleagues
in other countries and create a risk monitoring network
that could serve as part of an early warning system for
severe risks. The same facilities and network could be
used to share and develop common frameworks to
track issues and look for weak signals and emerging
risks. The Country Risk Officer (CRO) would complement
the kinds of macro-prudential supervision that countries
are currently discussing, helping towards making
those nations more resilient to financial shocks and
future crises.
Given the still fragile economic environment and the
pressures on national budgets, it is more important
than ever that a country considers what can be done to
prevent, where possible, extraneous shocks or at least
to be able to manage and finance their implications.
One example already operating is in the area of finance
for disaster risk. Financing can be arranged after the
event by redirecting funds from the budget, by borrowing
or by increasing taxes. Or funds can be secured in
advance through tools such as parametric or indexbased insurance. A recent successful example of how
governments can do this is the “Multi-Cat” (multiple
catastrophes) transaction that the Mexican government
signed with the World Bank. Working together with
Swiss Re, the World Bank has developed a programme
that enables governments to transfer the burden of
economic costs from natural catastrophes to the
capital markets.
By including such pre-event funding instruments in the
overall disaster risk financing mix, countries could be in
a position to reduce their financial exposure to natural
catastrophe risk and reduce the potential burden for
government budgets in the case of a major event.
Here too a CRO could play an important role, taking
a holistic approach to risk before events occur and
ultimately reducing the risk burden to society. Not only
can this help a nation financially, but it would also have
an important function in reassuring the population,
its neighbours and its investors that a country is
appropriately prepared for a disaster.

How corporations can apply the
findings of Global Risks 2010
Global Risks 2010 provides a framework for companies
to develop insights into systemic risks in the mid- to
long-term planning horizon. In general, corporations
face challenges in obtaining, interpreting and applying

34 | Global Risks 2010

information about systemic or “emerging” risks.
The report enables corporations to:
• Test assumptions in underlying strategic plans and
capital investments
• Understand and monitor the complex and changing
interrelationships between systemic risks
• Identify emerging opportunities within the emerging
trends or events
Corporations must continuously make decisions based
on long-term perspectives to secure profitable growth.
These include strategic decisions relating to new market
entry, mergers, acquisitions and divestitures, joint
ventures and partnerships, and capital investments.
Today most corporations, large or small, are participating
in the global economy and their decisions are taken
against an ever-changing backdrop of influences that are
external to the organization itself – macroeconomic
factors, regulatory change, geopolitical upheaval,
technological and product innovation, and sustainability
issues. To succeed in this complex environment,
corporations must develop processes to understand
how these uncertain events might impact their
organizations and supply chains, current competitors,
potential new market entrants and the governments in
the jurisdictions in which they operate.
Taking the long-term view
External and emerging risks pose challenges to most
risk assessment and risk management programmes
for a number of reasons. Typically, risk is considered
in terms of “impact and likelihood” based on internal
consensus, often involving very little external or expert
input. Corporate risk assessments rarely consider a
time frame beyond two to three years, or explicitly
examine the long-term volatility introduced by risks to
strategies with a five- to 10-year execution horizon.
Decision-making is further skewed by necessary focus
on the reporting of short-term results and known or
recent risks affecting the current period.
A portfolio of decisions to deal with uncertainty
Further, research shows that relatively few companies
effectively apply tools, such as scenario analysis, or
effectively integrate risk data into long-term strategic
planning. Historically, management would provide
business units with prescribed scenarios and the
business units would calibrate responses for each
scenario. Today, the scenarios are more varied and
the range of uncertainty within a scenario markedly
increased. To respond, management must adjust the
planning process to ensure it explicitly factors in this
increased uncertainty. Indeed, strategy setting must be
viewed as the optimization of a portfolio of decisions
based on a set of scenarios that reflect uncertainty.

Opportunities in complexity
Global Risks 2010 emphasizes that the interconnections
among risks can help management teams challenge
themselves to develop more robust scenarios. The
report’s tools, such as the Global Risks Barometer and
Risk Interconnections Map (RIM) highlight the trends and
connections between emerging risks and underlying
drivers in risk volatility. Taken together, these insights
can help broaden the scope of trends that are
considered and help management question the
long-term underpinnings and assumptions about their
supply chains and the competitive landscape.
As noted above, corporations must assess how risks
might directly or indirectly affect the organization as a
participant in a globally competitive marketplace and
as a member of a global supply chain. This information
must be factored into planning scenarios. The report’s
focus on the changing risk landscape can also be
used to identify emerging opportunities in markets or
sources that could provide the corporation with a
competitive edge.
It has become a truism to note that all corporations now
operate in a global economy. Reports, such as the
Global Risks reports, provide corporate management
with valuable long-term, external insights into the events
that might impact the success of strategic plans, the
performance of the overall supply chain and the emerging
opportunities embedded in a complex, interconnected
global economy.

Global Risks 2010 | 35

Conclusion
As suggested in this report, although the interconnected
view of global risks adds greater complexity to decisionmaking, it is vital in developing effective strategies to
manage risks. These interconnections do not always
reflect a direct causal relationship, as risks are often
linked indirectly through common impacts or mitigation
trade-offs. For many of the global risks discussed in this
report, the ownership of these risks remains fragmented
and unclear, and it is often difficult to identify actors
willing and able to take ownership. This, coupled with
the complexity of interdependencies, is perhaps why so
many of these issues remain endemic and systemic in
nature, although their existence and potential impact is
known. Global Risks 2008 already warned that should
a systemic financial risk lead to a serious deterioration
in the world economy, the impetus for collaborative
mitigation might falter as leaders’ attention turned to
more immediate concerns; the same is true for many
other so-called “creeping risks”. Thus far, the response
to the global impact of the financial crisis and ensuing
downturn has been a willingness to cooperate on
common strategies and more effective global governance
to address global risks. The next months and years
will put that willingness to test.
Thus, this fifth edition of Global Risks highlights that a
number of open questions remain and many of the
priorities flagged in earlier editions are still unaddressed.
This report is envisioned as part of an ongoing dialogue
between different stakeholders aimed at understanding
a complex, interconnected risks landscape. It suggests
how some of these challenges might be addressed and
by extension enhance global resilience to risk. To this
end, the Global Risk Network has worked closely with
the Forum’s Global Agenda Councils (GACs). At their
annual Summit on the Global Agenda, the Global Agenda
Councils offered some overarching recommendations
for more effective management of systemic risks and
vulnerabilities. They emphasized that these would need
to be applied globally and that more effective forms of
governance would be central to their efficacy. These
recommendations, which echo many of those made

36 | Global Risks 2010

in past Global Risks reports, were that institutions and
governments collaborate to:
• Take a long-term approach to global risk identification,
analysis, tracking and mitigation
• Use frameworks that reflect risk interconnections
rather than silo approaches
• Address the need for more robust data on key
risks and trends to be collected and shared in
a coordinated manner
• Conduct cost-benefit analysis on risk solutions to
improve fund allocation and better understand the
long-term benefits of investment choices
• Track emerging risks and educate leaders and the
public about real, rather than perceived threats
• Communicate clearly and consistently about the
nature of threats and about strategies to manage
and mitigate them
• Understand the influence of behavioural aspects
of risk perception
A call came from many of the councils for action
on these proposals to be taken by a new umbrella
mechanism or body, a “Global System Risk and
Vulnerability Facility” which could work with existing
groups to take up these proposals. Leaders now
recognize that the world is inadequately equipped to
deal with global risks. The context in which decisionmaking processes happen has shifted radically from
one where the immediate prevailed to one where a
long-term perspective is vital. To fight systemic crises
effectively we need systemic risk management. This
report is a reminder of the urgency for action at individual,
corporate, national and supra-national levels. “Going
back to business as usual” is no longer an option.
Behaviour needs to change at all levels: individual,
corporate, political, if new, more forward-looking models
and mechanisms for global governance are to be truly
effective in managing the risks the world faces.

Appendix 1: Processes and Definitions
How global risks are defined
The criteria for global risks have been set as follows:
Global Scope: To be considered global, a risk should
have the potential to affect no less than three world
regions on at least two different continents. While
these risks may have regional or even local origin, their
impact can potentially be felt globally.
Cross-Industry Relevance: The risk has to affect
three or more industries.
Uncertainty: There is uncertainty about how the risk
manifests itself within 10 years combined with uncertainty
about the magnitude of its impact (assessed in terms
of likelihood and severity).
Economic Impact: The risk has the potential to
cause economic damage of US$ 10 billion or more.
Multistakeholder Approach: The complexity of
the risk both in terms of its effects and its drivers, as
well as its interlinkages with other risks, requires a
multistakeholder approach for its mitigation. The risks
are classified in five domains: economic, geopolitical,
environmental, societal and technological risks.
The Risks Interconnection Map (RIM) and Global
Risks Experts Perception Survey
One of the highlights of the Global Risks report is the
analysis of the interconnectedness between global
risks (see Figure 13). By detailing these links, the report
aims to increase awareness and understanding of the
interlinkages among risk issues and what this implies
for decisions on risk management and mitigation.
The data used to build the Risk Interconnections Map
(RIM, see Figure 13) is drawn from two sources:
1. The connections and strengths are developed using
data from the Global Risks Experts Perception Survey
2010. This Web-based survey was completed
over the third quarter of 2009 by over 200 experts,
business leaders and policy-makers from the
Forum’s and the Report partners’ networks, as well
as members of the Forum’s Global Agenda Councils.
The survey assesses how respondents perceive a
selection of global risks tracked by the Global Risk
Network (see above section “How global risks are
defined”). For each risk respondents are asked to
select 3 other risks from the taxonomy of global
risks that they consider are the most connected to
the risk in question. The aim is not to determine
causal relationships among the risks or to identify
drivers and consequences, but rather to determine
the number and strength of interconnections
between different risks.

2. The nodes on the RIM represent the same
assessment data for severity and likelihood as
in the Global Risks Landscape and the Global
Risks Barometer, which are drawn from qualitative
assessment that represents the aggregate views of
experts from the partners involved in this Report. A
greater node size indicates a higher likelihood (%),
while a thicker node circumference shows a higher
severity (US$). Each line represents a connection
to another risk, while their thickness indicates the
strength of the relationship between them.
The Global Risks Landscape
The visualisation of risk on the landscape places risks
by severity of impact (measured in US$) on the vertical
axis and the likelihood of occurrence on the horizontal
axis over a 10-year time horizon. The numerical
assessment of these categories of risks is created
through qualitative assessment by the partners of the
report. The risks which appear in the upper right-hand
corner are those with the highest impact and highest
likelihood and are the focus of the narrative of this report.
A note on the regional map of risk exposure
produced by Zurich Financial Services (Figure 3)
The analysis is based on a methodology and data
set developed by Zurich Financial Services. The
methodology is broadly comparable to statistical
cluster analysis that partitions a data set into subsets
(or clusters) with the data in each subset (cluster)
sharing common characteristics – in this case the
characteristics are risks. Countries with similar risks are
close neighbours on the risk map; they form clusters.
In contrast, countries that are dissimilar with respect
to their risk characteristics are displayed comparatively
far apart from each other.
The data set covers 158 countries and more than 30
global risks. The risks are grouped in five risk classes:
economic, environmental, health, geopolitical and
technological risks. Data are drawn from established and
reliable public sources and incorporated into the model
using metrics developed by Zurich Financial Services
for a spectrum of risk ranging from low to high.

Global Risks 2010 | 37

Appendix 2: Global Risks Barometer 2010

Economic Risks
Risk description

Drivers and developments to watch

Food price volatility
Rising and volatile prices affect poor
consumers globally (those whose consumption
basket is more than 50% food)

+ Commodity price fluctuations as a function of the global business cycle
+ Commodity price fluctuations as a function of deteriorating climate conditions
+ Government price ceilings on food prices, leading to reallocation of production and food shortages in the future
+/- Input prices, typically related to fossil fuel prices
+/- Regional climate variation remains the largest driver of seasonal price volatility
- Progress in and access to agricultural technologies allowing for enhanced yields
- Proliferation of policy frameworks to foster investments in agriculture and rural development
- Implementation of social safety nets specifically targeted to benefit vulnerable societies

Oil price spikes
Sharp and/or sustained oil price increases
place further economic pressures on highly oildependent industries and consumers, as well
as raising geopolitical tensions

+ Expected growth rates in key emerging markets
+ Extreme weather patterns
+ Geopolitical tensions
+ Factors driving potential terrorist events
- Investments in exploration and production capacity
- Economic and political stability in oil-producing countries
- Ability of OPEC to establish price floors
- Implementation of high energy-efficient, low-carbon technologies
- Clear and consistent biofuels policy development

Major fall in the US dollar
An abrupt, major fall in the value of the US
dollar with impact throughout the global
economic and financial system

+ Redirection of investments by major US dollar reserve-holding countries
+/- Monetary policy differentials in the US and its major trading partners
+/- Attractiveness of the US as destination for international portfolio flows
+/- Relative growth differentials between the US and its major trading partners

Slowing Chinese economy
Sudden reduction in China’s growth to 6% or
less

+ Excess ex-ante savings over-investments in China
+/- Chinese government’s ability to stabilize domestic demand in the wake of loss in export momentum
+/- Ability of Chinese government to maintain stable renminbi in the wake of high foreign reserve accumulation
+/- Ability of Chinese government to maintain political stability in the wake of sizeable loss in growth momentum

Fiscal crises
Overstretch of fiscal positions generates
unsustainable levels of debt, rising interest
rates, inflationary pressures and sovereign
debt crises

+ Short-run developments in fiscal positions due to cyclical deterioration, automatic stabilizers and stimulus
programmes
+ Rising interest rates
+ Demographic developments; mainly ageing populations in advanced economies
+/- Clarity around the timing and stages of exit strategies
+/- Changes in entitlement programmes
- Reform of social systems
- Persistently high rates of inflation

Asset price collapse
A collapse of real and financial assets in
advanced and emerging market economies
leads to the destruction of wealth,
deleveraging, reduced household spending
and demand

+ Sharp increase in financial asset prices
+ Sharp increase in prices of real assets (commercial and private real estate, commodities)
+ Increased volatility in financial asset prices
- Changes in central banks’ policy frameworks modifying price stability goals and giving more weight
to overall financial stability

Retrenchment from globalization
(developed)
Multiple developed economies adopt
policies that create barriers to flows of
goods, capital and labour and fail to
engage with multilateral governance
structures to address global challenges

+ New trade barriers (implicit and explicit through tariffs and subsidies) erected
+ Increase in anti-dumping suits
+ Increased hurdles to cross-border labour migration
+ Failure of Doha trade negotiations
+ Consequences of regulatory reforms constraining capital flows
+/- Change in outsourcing and offshoring patterns of multinational corporations
+ Populist parties gaining ground in elections or coming to power in developed nations

Retrenchment from globalization
(emerging)
Multiple emerging economies adopt policies
that create barriers to flows of goods,
capital and labour and fail to engage with
multilateral governance structures to
address global challenges

+
+
+
+
+
+

Burden of regulation
If not balanced, regulation can have
unintended consequences for industry
structures and market competition,
distorting the allocation of capital and
constraining investment and the power to
innovate

+ Measures to tighten financial sector regulation
+ Government intervention in support of weak corporations in finance and manufacturing
+ Changes in rules and red tape governing various industries

Underinvestment in infrastructure
Failure to invest in physical or intangible
infrastructure hinders growth and
development and results in major

+ Constraints on fiscal budgets and need to cut infrastructure spending
+ Regulatory interventions that impair efficacy of the financial system
+ Reports about attempted attacks on, and outright failures of, critical information infrastructure and
power grids
+ Difficulties for the private sector to raise financing or secure guarantees for large projects

New trade barriers (implicit and explicit through tariffs and subsidies) erected
Increase in anti-dumping suits
Increased hurdles to cross-border labour migration
Failure of Doha trade negotiations
Measures to close domestic markets to capital inflows and foreign direct investments
Populist parties gain ground in elections or come to power in developing nations

=
Same assessment as last year

Increased

Decreased
Plus signs (+) denote drivers increasing risk; minus signs (-) denote drivers that reduce risk

Key:

Global impact

Likelihood

Severity







=

Adverse impact on the stability of the US financial markets and force the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates in
defence of the dollar to levels not commensurate with growth
An abrupt decline in the US dollar relative to the currencies of major US trading partners would affect an already
weakened financial system and a weak global economy

=

=

China’s economy is firmly linked to the global economy and to the global capital markets; it is a large importer of
commodities
The country’s reserves are invested abroad (predominantly in US government bonds)
China has developed a strong presence on the African continent through direct investments and development aid
A loss in China’s growth momentum could adversely affect global capital and commodity markets

=

=





=

=



=

=

=



=





Rising food prices affect mostly landless and the poorest in disadvantaged regions
There is clear evidence in some crops that small producers enter and exit the sector in cycles in response to market
prices, exacerbating price volatility
Malnutrition and health consequences in the poorest segments of global society
Social unrest and riots

According to the International Energy Agency (IEA), a sustained US$ 10/barrel increase in the price of oil could
lower growth of global GDP by 0.5 percentage points (pct pts) in the subsequent year
Depending on the oil-sensitivity of growth, the adverse impact is substantially higher in emerging market and
developing countries; the first-year loss of growth could be 0.8 pct pts in Asia and up to 1.6 pct pts in highly
indebted developing countries
In addition to adverse impacts for growth effects, substantially higher oil prices generate current account surpluses in
producing countries, which may exacerbate global macroeconomic imbalances and fuel financial market turbulence

According to an IMF baseline scenario, government debt-to-GDP ratios for the G20 countries will increase from 63% in
2007 to 85% by 2014. In advanced G20 countries, the increase will be even more pronounced, from 78% to 114%
The marked deterioration is likely to exert strong upward pressure on real interest rates; according to IMF estimates, an
aggregate deterioration in the global debt-to-GDP ratio of 10 percentage points may raise global interest rates by 40
basis points
In highly indebted economies, spreads on government bonds may rise significantly, exacerbating the risk of sovereign
debt crises

Recent experience and long-term studies underscore the devastating impact the collapse of real and financial
assets can have on the real economy (in terms of lost output) and the financial system (in terms of loss in
allocative efficiency)
The current financial crisis led to a global recession with a loss in world output of 1.5% and a contraction in
advanced economies of roughly 3.5%
Future asset price collapses may cause similar outcomes depending on sectors involved and their
geographic location
2009 saw sharp decline in global trade, mostly due to the global recession; however, the World Bank also
observed an underlying increase in protectionist measures
Similarly, proposed financial market regulation may have the unintended consequence of stifling capital market
growth and innovation leading to substantial adverse welfare effects and lower growth rates of potential output

A retrenchment from globalization would cut off emerging market countries from the benefits of globalization,
such as access to global capital markets, intellectual know-how and best practices disseminated through the
presence of globally active corporations
While these benefits are difficult to quantify, a retrenchment would clearly set both emerging and advanced
economies on a lower growth trajectory of potential output

Balanced regulation undoubtedly benefits a majority of stakeholders but increases the cost of doing business
A recent study by Deloitte done for the FSA on the financial sector suggests the total global incremental burden
of regulation would fall into a range from US$ 100 billion to US$ 500 billion

The American Society of Civil Engineers puts US infrastructure needs at about US$ 2.2 trillion over a time span
of five years, which would require annual investments of about 3% of GDP.
The impact of catastrophic failure would be a multiple of annual investments

Geopolitical Risks
Risk description

Drivers and developments to watch

International terrorism
International terrorists continue to mount
sizeable attacks, causing significant economic
and human losses and exacerbating
retrenchment from globalization

+ Instability on the Indian sub-continent, particularly Indo-Pakistani relations but also indigenous movements such
as Naxalites
+ Level of political radicalization from the economic crisis
+ Weak governance in parts of Africa provides alternative retreat positions to Afghanistan and Pakistan
+/- Whether security gains are sustainable and lasting after US withdrawal from Iraq
- New and credible peace efforts in Israel/Middle East
- The West’s pressure on the terrorists’ sanctuaries in Afghanistan
and the Horn of Africa
+ Other marginalized groups such as ETA remain active

Nuclear proliferation
Multiple states pursue nuclear armament, with
associated increase in geopolitical tensions

+ Iran’s nuclear ambitions, particularly whether it will test a nuclear device or seek de facto nuclear status
with the capability to develop a nuclear device on short notice
+ Rising demand for nuclear energy capacity as an alternative to fossil fuels may lead to more countries
developing nuclear capacity
+/- North Korea’s cooperation on nuclear disarmament
+ Difficulty in enforcing NPT, even among signatories
+/- Whether Brazil sticks to the promises and agreements of a nuclear weapons-free South America

Iran
Iran's nuclear programme and its role in the
Middle East increases instability and tensions
regionally and internationally

+ If Iran develops and tests a nuclear weapon, the regional power balance would be threatened
+ Israel-Iran tensions
+ Confrontation between Iran and Western powers would impact oil supply
+/- Internal instability within the country could lead to more hard-line stance by the Iranian leadership or
regime change
+/- Shifting power and influence of Russia and China

North Korea
North Korea becomes increasingly unstable
and unpredictable, causing domestic suffering
and heightening tensions regionally and
internationally

+/- Regime stability and power transition in North Korea
+/- Level of support by China and, to a lesser extent, Russia of North Korea
- Inter-Korean relations and rapprochement
- Control, inspection and verification activities on disarmament

Afghanistan instability
Nation-building in Afghanistan fails, providing
haven for international terrorist groups and
triggering increasing instability in Pakistan

+ Taliban seems to be emerging stronger than before, which means more fighting, loss of life and
destruction of property
+ Divide among the civilian population with conflicting patronage could lead to civil unrest and more internal fighting
+ Destabilizing elements in neighbouring Pakistan and Iran could perpetuate instability post-Allied forces withdrawal
- Corruption and weak governance and national institutions

Transnational crime and corruption
Penetration of organized crime in the global
economy increases significantly over a 10-year
period, weakening state authority, worsening
the investment climate and slowing growth

+ Harsh economic conditions linked to increased illicit activity and corruption
+/- tighter regulatory environment across services and products
- Greater information sharing and collaboration across different jurisdictions and security, trade and
financial agencies

Israel-Palestine
Worsening Israel-Palestinian conflict claims
thousands of lives over a 10-year period, and
exacerbates geopolitical tensions and
economic decline throughout the region

+/- Willingness of parties to reach a consensus on key issues such as settlements and Jerusalem
+ US diplomatic efforts could have significant impact on the peace process and tangible outcomes
- Level of international support and pressure for new peace efforts
- Increased influence of hard-line or religious groups on either side
- Regime stability and governance in Palestinian Territories
- Influence of Iran through its support for militants

Iraq
Stabilization efforts in Iraq fail, violence and
terrorism proliferate, resulting in loss of life and
further destabilization of the region

+/- A timetable for a withdrawal of US and Allied forces
+/- The level of sectarian violence between Shia, Sunni groups
+/- The level of autonomy and secession of the Kurdish territories
- Improved capacity of the Iraqi security apparatus
+ Involvement of Iran and other neighbours

Global governance gaps
Weak or inadequate global institutions and
agreements, and competing national/political
interests impede necessary collaboration on
global risks

+ Various governments are working at national level to reform national regulations; however,
agreement at international level seems to be remote
+ It will take time for a new standards and governance system to come into effect
+ Significant gap in standards and governance among three major regions: Asia, Europe and US
+ Delay in new international governance set-up
- G20 now established, marking a shift from the “G8+” approach

=
Same assessment as last year

Increased

Decreased
Plus signs (+) denote drivers increasing risk; minus signs (-) denote drivers that reduce risk
Key:

Likelihood

Severity



=

Potential for greater diplomatic tensions or even conflict among states in efforts to prevent access to nuclear capacity
Increased need for spending on intelligence and surveillance
Breakdown of regional trade and drag on development

=

=

Economic loss and difficulties for the Iranian population as a result of embargo and sanctions
Disruption in oil supply to the rest of the word if there is further confrontation between Iran and Western powers
Loss of life if the countries engage in war
Link to extremism and terrorism

=

=



=





Economic loss and significant burden on business and individuals
Drag on growth in developing countries

=

=

Loss of life and suffering
Absence of any economic development in the Palestinian regions
Drag on growth and development in the wider region
Link to terrorism and extremism

=

=







=

Global impact
Al-Qaeda and its affiliates remain active. Sporadic terrorist attacks by these and other groups remain a threat in multiple
countries
2009 saw a significant rise of attacks in Pakistan
Diplomatic and military escalations can both result from and drive some of these incidents
Travel, local commerce and tourism are affected in regions where fears of terrorism run high

Less expenditure on arms and more focus on trade on the Korean Peninsula
If regime comes down, exodus of North Koreans to neighbouring countries
Economic strain on South Korea and the region due to handling fallout from a collapsing North

More regional instability, including Pakistan
Exploding economic and political costs in the West to continue military campaign
Other neighbouring countries/powers becoming embroiled in conflict
Loss of life and suffering
Link to extremism and terrorism

Loss of life and suffering
Regional instability
Destruction of infrastructure in Iraq
Link to terrorism and extremism

Economic inefficiency due to tariffs and barriers
Increased likelihood of systemic risks
Regulatory arbitrage opportunity

Environmental Risks
Risk description

Drivers and developments to watch

Extreme weather
Increasing severity of extreme weather events
due to climate change results in greater
damage to the environment, infrastructure and
property, displaced populations and loss of life

+ Current global emission path
+ Population growth and/or economic development in risky regions (e.g. coastal cities)
+/- Impact of current economic environment on commitments to long term climate change mitigation activity
+/- Outcome of COP15 conference in Copenhagen and commitment of government on CO2 emission
reductions goals
- Implementation of mitigation measures by government
- Adaptation measures by government and participations of NGOs and private industry
- Investment on renewable and green infrastructure projects
- Technological developments in improving energy efficiency
- Public-Private-Partnership on policies, data sharing, methodology, and risk management practices
- Data gathering on changing climatic conditions and vulnerability of assets and life in exposed parts of the world

Droughts and desertification
Increased frequency and severity of heatwaves
and droughts and the spread of desertification
significantly reduce agricultural yields around
the world and displace populations

+ Population growth and resource-intensive consumption patterns
+ Changing weather cycles due to climate change
+ Soil erosion
+ Affected size of the population and region as percentage of GDP
- International, national and regional policies and rules on deforestation
- Reforestation drive supported by PPP
- Adaptation measures in the form of insurance and reinsurance
- Comprehensive policy measures for long-term prevention and adaptation
- Use of technology to increase crop yield/water usage ratios

Water scarcity
Declining quality and quantity of water leads to
water shortages, increased health risks, conflict
and population displacement

+ Population growth and resource-intensive consumption patterns
+ Changing rainfall patterns
+ Increase of water use in generation of energy
- International policies and governance on water use for irrigation and drinking
- Bilateral agreements for sharing water resources and reservoirs spanning across country borders
- More efficient distribution channels and efficient use of the available water resources

NatCat: Cyclone
An extreme tropical storm hits an economic
centre or a densely populated area

+ Population growth and density in cyclone-prone areas
+ Significant changes in climatic conditions and sea temperature
+ Changing weather cycles
+ Under-investment in critical infrastructure, e.g. in resilient electricity grids
+/- Global emission development path
- Improvements in building codes and construction are being outweighed by asset value and population
concentration in coastal areas
- PPP in adaptation and rehabilitation measures of the population
- Willingness and preparedness to take proactive steps in the event of impending storm activity

NatCat: Earthquake
A strong earthquake hits an economic centre
or densely populated area such as Tokyo, Los
Angeles, San Francisco, Beijing or Mumbai

+ Population growth and density in earthquake-prone locations
- New technology and methodology for more sensitive detection and early warning systems
- Effectiveness and efficiency of crisis management capabilities in affected areas (mitigation plans and
execution efficiency)
- New design and technology for more resilient infrastructure and buildings in earthquake-prone regions

NatCat: Inland flooding
Extreme inland flooding of the Mississippi,
Yangtze, Thames or Rhine rivers, for example,
causes direct economic and human losses
and serious disruption downstream

+ Population growth and density in areas prone to inland flooding
- Further investment in infrastructure for drainage and control of inland flooding
- Systematic and long-term plans to move people and property from danger zones
- Pre- and post-flood preparedness (early warning systems and evacuation plans)
- Insurance for potential damages
+/- Changing rainfall patterns

NatCat: Coastal flooding
Rising sea levels, coastal flooding and erosion
affect property and infrastructure and displace
people and economic activity

+ Population growth and density in coastal areas
- New technology and collaboration on early detection and warning systems
- Evacuation plans
- Insurance and rehabilitation plans
- Data sharing and international cooperation on flood protection
+/- Global emission path
+ Trend and speed of landlocked ice melting

Air pollution
Poor air quality leads to increased incidence of
acute respiratory diseases and allergies,
reducing productivity and increasing health
costs

- National regulations on pollution controls
- Regional policies and directives on pollution control measures
+ Over-reliance on fossil fuels for energy production to meet forecast demand
- Improved technology for energy use and waste treatment
+ Long-term health impacts and increased health costs
+/- New US administration willingness to act on environmental issues
- Implementation of anti-pollution technologies

Biodiversity loss
Degradation of biodiversity results in severely
depleted stocks of resources in fishery, forestry
and other bio-services with potentially
irreversible consequences for the environment

+ Population growth and resource-intensive consumption patterns
+ Over-fishing (oceans, lakes and rivers)
- International agreement on GHG emissions
- Active national plans on adaptation measures and protection of biodiversity
- Legal and economic support to less-developed nations/communities for the preservation of biodiversity
- International, national and local awareness on the issue
- Introduction of geo-engineering
- Protection of rain forests and high biodiversity regions (e.g. wetlands and swamps)
- Global agreement on forestation/deforestation

=
Same assessment as last year

Increased

Decreased
Plus signs (+) denote drivers increasing risk; minus signs (-) denote drivers that reduce risk
Key:

Global impact

Likelihood

Severity













Economic losses and loss of life
Migration and resettlement of population
Increased vulnerability of ageing infrastructure
Investment in rebuilding the infrastructure

=



Tremendous economic loss and loss of life
Destruction of infrastructure
Displacement and rehabilitation of people
Infrastructure losses

=













=





Damage to infrastructure and loss of property
Loss of life
Migration of human population
Irreversible change in environment
Effect on biodiversity

Increase in economic losses
Inefficient use of land resources
Change in weather patterns
Migration of human populations
Concentration of populations in regions with access to water
Competition for scarce resources
Biodiversity loss
Further damage to the environment
Increase cost of water exploitation and transportation
Increased cost of water consumption
Conflict over water
Decrease in drinking water quality and spread of diseases
Extreme scarcity of drinking water in some parts of the world

Economic loss and loss of life
Destruction of infrastructure
Displacement and rehabilitation of people
Infrastructure losses

Economic loss and loss of life
Destruction of infrastructure
Displacement and rehabilitation of people
Infrastructure losses

Increased health costs
Decrease in productivity
Loss of life

Extinction of flora and fauna
Changes in habitat
Irreversible damage to environment through deforestation and ecological imbalance
Reduction in agricultural and fishery yields
Migration

Societal Risks
Risk description

Drivers and developments to watch

Pandemics
A lack of preparedness to respond to a
pandemic of a highly infectious disease at the
international, state or corporate levels
exacerbates loss of life and results in the
breakdown of essential systems (ICT, power,
supply chains)

+ International awareness on the pandemic and its impact
+ Transmission ability of the new viral strains (viral evolutionary rule)
- Effective monitoring and communication of virus activity
+ Emergence of H1N1 and new strains of the virus
- Coordination of public and private resources in mitigation planning
- Coordination of response and mitigation by different countries
- Availability of vaccine for specific disease (H1N1)
- Supply-chain preparedness and cooperation
- Emergency communication, transportation and treatment infrastructure

Infectious diseases
The incidence and patterns of known
(e.g. TB, malaria, cholera, HIV/AIDS) and new
infectious diseases shift to new regions and
population segments

-

Chronic diseases
Chronic diseases (cardiovascular, cancer,
diabetes and chronic respiratory disease)
spread rapidly throughout the developed and
developing world, driving up health costs and
reducing productivity and economic growth

- Awareness about the importance of a healthy diet and physical activity
- New scientific data on causal links
- Advances in diagnostics, drug development and therapeutics
- Improved understanding of genetic factors and precise treatment mechanisms
+ Health and insurance costs
+/- Linkage to productivity and economic development

Liability regimes
The spread of US-style liability regimes to
other jurisdictions reduces personal
accountability and loss sharing, and global
insurance capacity, undermining investment
and growth.

+/- EU regulation on how to deal with collective redress and burden of proof
+ Activism of consumer protection groups and emergence of new consumer protection laws
+ Formation of legal cells working on commission basis

Migration
In the absence of adapted socio-economic
policies (e.g. labour policies) in both
donor and recipient countries, migration
(including illegal) triggers social tensions
and nationalistic movements

+ Increasing parochialism, especially given current economic conditions and development in coming years
+ Internal, regional and international conflicts
- Pre-emptive social measures to deal with economic issues
- Equitable sharing of resources and infrastructure by all
- Fair trade measures through WTO, IMF, etc., and effective governance framework
- An international migration framework taking into account the economic hardships of poor countries
on one hand and ageing populations on the other

International coordination in dealing with these diseases
Availability of vaccine and treatment drugs at affordable prices
Development of generic treatment drugs made available to poor populations
Policy and legal support at international and national levels
Incentives for pharma industry regarding patent rights
Public health policies and education

Technological Risks
CII breakdown
Susceptibility of CII to attacks or system
failures creates domino effect, shutting down
IT-dependent applications in power, water,
transport, banking and finance, and
emergency management.

+/- New technology hardware and software development
- Data and information sharing among governments and between government and private institutions
- Acceptance of the concept of infrastructure sharing in emergency situations
- Legal framework to penalize offenders
- Resilience of institutions
- Detection of events and BCM effectiveness
+ Space weather disturbances

Nanoparticle toxicity
Studies reveal health impairment due to
exposure to widely-used nanoparticles (paint,
cosmetics, healthcare). Primary impacts on
public health, secondary impacts on
investment in a range of nanotechnologies

- More scientific evidence establishing the cause and effect chain
- Legal obligation of the producers to label the negative effects of product usage
+ Increase in nano-material and technology use
- Public demand for labelling
+/- Protection for nano-material and technology use

Data fraud/loss
Major accidental loss of data or fraud triggers
backlash against the organization/body
holding that data and broader loss of
confidence in data sharing and accumulation

- Development of best practices for data security
- Legal framework to penalize culprits
- Information sharing among governments and private firms regarding loss events
+ Penetration of Internet, especially user-generated content
- Stronger perception of data fraud as a compliance issue (in public discussion)

=
Same assessment as last year

Increased

Decreased
Plus signs (+) denote drivers increasing risk; minus signs (-) denote drivers that reduce risk

Key:

Global impact
Loss of life
Tremendous burden on critical resources and services
Perhaps long-term impact of vaccination if not thoroughly tested
Loss of productivity and economic loss

Loss of life
Loss of productivity
Extra burden on the healthcare system
Re-emergence of drug-resistant bacteria and other pathogens
Migration of the diseases to other regions through travel and contacts

Increase in death rates due to these diseases
Loss of productivity
Increased healthcare costs
Decreased productivity and quality of life

Increased legal costs, which will eventually be borne by consumers and/or taxpayers
Shifting of business to other countries where liability regimes are less stringent

Suffering of people and destruction of resources in forced migrations
In case of conflict, more retaliatory measures against and barriers to movement of resources and people
Societal impacts as/if migrant workers return to home countries
Loss of remittances from diaspora

Potentially severe disruption to critical services and systems (communications, energy and financial)
Disruption of business services
Disruption of critical government services
Loss of trust in systems and technology
Direct and indirect economic losses

Long-term impact on health and healthcare systems
Product recalls
Plethora of court cases on product liability
Change in technical and chemical design of nanotechnology and nanochemicals
Insurance claims

Loss of trust in the data systems
Standardization of protocols and technology for data storage and transmission
Acceptance of breach of privacy as people share more and more private information through social networking platforms
Negative image impact on organizations processing mass data (telecoms, utilities, transportation,
governmental organizations)

Likelihood

Severity









=





=











=





Contributors and Acknowledgements
This report was prepared by the Global Risk Network
of the World Economic Forum in conjunction with
its partners.
Global Risk Network, World Economic Forum
Irene Casanova, Associate Director,
Global Risk Network
Viktoria Ivarsson, Senior Project Manager,
Global Risks Report
Stéphane Oertel, Associate Director,
Global Risk Network
Carissa Sahli, Team Coordinator,
Strategic Insight Teams
Sheana Tambourgi, Director, Head of the Global
Risk Network; Editor, Global Risks 2010
Global Risks Report Partners : Core Team
Citi
John Ingraham, Managing Director, Risk Architecture,
and Head, Risk Aggregation, Citi, USA
Marsh & McLennan Companies (MMC)
Alina Lantsberg, Oliver Wyman (MMC), USA
Lucy Nottingham, Oliver Wyman (MMC), USA
Roland Rechtsteiner, Partner, Oliver Wyman, Switzerland
Christine Salerno, Director, Corporate Social
Responsibility, Marsh & McLennan Companies
(MMC), USA
Alex Wittenberg, Partner, Oliver Wyman (MMC), USA
Swiss Re
Esther Baur, Director, Head Issue Management &
Messages, Swiss Re, Switzerland
David Bresch, Director, Head Sustainability &
Emerging Risk Management, Swiss Re, Switzerland
Anwarul Hasan, Vice-President, Senior Risk Manager,
Swiss Re, Switzerland
Kurt Karl, Senior Vice-President, Head of Economic
Research & Consulting, Swiss Re America Holding
Corp., USA
Reto Schneider, Director, Head of Emerging Risk
Management, Swiss Re, Switzerland
Raj Singh, Chief Risk Officer, Member of the Executive
Board, Swiss Re, Switzerland
Lisa Wyssbrod, Director, Senior Issue and Partnership
Manager, Swiss Re, Switzerland
The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, USA
Howard Kunreuther, Cecilia Yen Koo Professor of
Decision Sciences and Public Policy, The Wharton
School, University of Pennsylvania, USA
Erwann Michel-Kerjan, Managing Director, Center for
Risk Management and Decision Processes, The
Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, USA

46 | Global Risks 2010

Zurich Financial Services, Switzerland
Daniel M. Hofmann, Group Chief Economist,
Zurich Financial Services, Switzerland
Kerry Karageorgis, Development Director Global Risk
Assessment, Zurich Financial Services, Switzerland
Axel P. Lehmann, Chief Risk Officer, Member of the
Group Executive Committee, Zurich Financial
Services, Switzerland
Samuel Schenker, Research Assistant Global Risk
Assessment, Zurich Financial Services, Switzerland
Michael Szoenyi, Leader Natural Hazards Working
Group, Zurich Financial Services, Switzerland
Ashutosh Riswadkar, Director Liability Line of
Business, Zurich Financial Services, Switzerland

Expert input
Over the past year, the Global Risk Network has
engaged with an extended group of experts in
workshops and meetings held in Copenhagen, Dalian,
London, New Delhi, New York, Tokyo, Washington DC
and Zurich. Thanks to the wide range of expertise and
invaluable insights provided through these workshops,
the Global Risk Network continues to support
multistakeholder dialogue to improve the
understanding of global risks.
We would like to thank all of those who contributed
for their time and, above all, their insights:
Giles Archibald, Client Service Group Leader,
Mercer (MMC), United Kingdom
Tom Armitage, Vice-President, Senior
Communications Consultant, Swiss Re, Switzerland
Shumeet Banerji, Chief Executive Officer, Booz &
Company, United Kingdom
Kai Bender, Partner, Oliver Wyman (MMC), Germany
Ann Bernstein, Executive Director, Centre for
Development and Enterprise (CDE), South Africa
Ian Bremmer, President, Eurasia Group, USA
Alessio Brown, Head of Reforming the Welfare Society
Research Area, Executive Director Global Economic
Symposium (GES), Kiel Institute for the World
Economy, Germany
Chris Bunting, Secretary-General, International Risk
Governance Council (IRGC), Switzerland
Matthew Burrows, Director of Analysis and Production
Staff, National Intelligence Council (NIC), USA
Rakesh Chaudhry, Professor of Strategic
Management, IILM Institute for Higher Education, India
Graciela Chichilnisky, Professor of Economics,
Columbia University, USA
Sean Cleary, Chairman, Strategic Concepts, South Africa
Uri Dadush, Senior Associate and Director,
International Economics Programme, Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace, USA

Michael Denton, Partner, Oliver Wyman (MMC), USA
Patrick Dixon, Director and Chief Executive Officer,
Global Change, United Kingdom
Daniel Drezner, Professor of International Politics,
Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, USA
John Drzik, CEO, Oliver Wyman (MMC), USA
Rajeev Dubey, Deputy Editor, Businessworld, India
Thomas Easton, Asia Business Editor, The Economist,
Hong Kong SAR
Thomas Epprecht, Director, Risk Expert,
Swiss Re, Switzerland
Willy Fill, Director, Business Continuity Manager, Swiss
Re, Switzerland
Raymond Fisman, Professor of Economics and
Finance, Columbia Business School, USA
Helmut Fluhrer, Chief Executive Officer, Meteo
Systems AG, Switzerland
Robert Fox, Partner, Oliver Wyman (MMC), USA
Georges Galey, Vice-President, Senior Underwriter
Property, Swiss Re, Switzerland
Susan Glasser, Executive Editor, Foreign Policy
Magazine, USA
Boris Galonske, Partner, Oliver Wyman (MMC),
Switzerland
Alan W. Hall, Global Policy Coordinator, Global Water
Partnership (GWP), Sweden
Gideon Henderson, Professor, 21st Century School,
University of Oxford, United Kingdom
Satoru Hiraga, Representative Director, Marsh Broker
Japan, Inc., Japan
Roman Hohl, Director, Head Agriculture Australasia
and Corporates, Swiss Re, Switzerland
Blake Hounshell, Managing Editor, Foreign Policy
Magazine, USA
Steve Howard, Chief Executive Officer, The Climate
Group, United Kingdom
José Miguel Insulza, Secretary-General, Organization
of American States (OAS), USA
Yoko Ishikura, Professor, Graduate School of
International Corporate Strategy, Hitotsubashi
University, Japan
Hastings (Hasty) Johnson, Vice Chairman and Chief
Financial Officer, Hines, USA
Parag Khanna, Director, Global Governance Initiative
and Senior Research Fellow, American Strategy
Program, New American Foundation, USA
Atul Khosla, Partner, Oliver Wyman, (MMC) India
Bram A. de Klerk, Group General Manager, Sasol
Limited, South Africa
Robert Kopech, Partner, Oliver Wyman (MMC), USA
and Adjunct Assistant Professor of International and
Public Affairs, School of International and Public
Affairs, Columbia University, USA
Kiyoshi Kurokawa, Professor, National Graduate
Institute for Policy Studies (GRIPS), Japan

Charles D. Lake, Chairman and Representative,
Aflac, Japan
Sophie Lambin, Director, Global Thought Leadership,
PricewaterhouseCoopers, United Kingdom
Bernice Lee, Research Director, Energy, Environment
and Resource Governance, The Royal Institute of
International Affairs, Chatham House, United Kingdom
Ann Li, Vice President, New York City Economic
Development Corporation, USA
Cheng Li, Director of Research and Senior Fellow,
Foreign Policy, John L. Thornton China Center,
Brookings Institution, USA
C.V. Madhukar, Director, PRS Legislative Research, India
Don Mango, Managing Director, Guy Carpenter
(MMC), USA
Trevor Mapplebeck, Partner, Oliver Wyman (MMC),
Canada
John Merkovsky, Global Leader, Marsh Risk
Consulting Practice (MMC), USA
Masahiko Metoki, General Manager for International
Strategy and Corporate Planning, Japan Post Service
Co. Ltd, Japan
Luis Moreno, President, Inter-American Development
Bank, USA
David Nadler, Vice Chairman, Marsh & McLennan
Companies (MMC), USA
Moíses Naím, Editor-in-Chief, Foreign Policy
Magazine, USA
Jeanne Ng, Director, Group Environmental Affairs, CLP
Holdings, Hong Kong SAR
Herbert Oberhänsli, Head, Economic and International
Relations, Nestlé, Switzerland
Sandeep Parekh, Visiting Associate Faculty, Indian
Institute of Management Ahmedabad, India
Richard T. Pascale, Associate Fellow, Saïd Business
School, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
Minxin Pei, Tom and Margot Pritzker ‘72 Professor of
Government and Director, Keck Center for
International and Strategic Studies, Claremont
McKenna College, USA
Aaron Pereira, Co-Founder, CanadaHelps and
Vartana, United Kingdom
Jim Pierce, Managing Director, Marsh (MMC), USA
Morten Poulsen-Hansen, Global Risk Project Manager,
Group Finance & Operations, Risk Management,
Vestas Wind Systems A/S, Denmark
Kenneth Prewitt, Carnegie Professor of Public Affairs,
School of International and Public Affairs (SIPA),
Columbia University, USA
Vanessa Rossi, Senior Research Fellow, International
Economics Programme, Chatham House,
United Kingdom
Michael J. Roux, Chairman, Roux International, Australia
Karl Sauvant, Special Adviser, UN Millennium Project;
Executive Director, Columbia Program on International
Investment, Columbia University, USA

Global Risks 2010 | 47

Orville H. Schell, Director, Center of US-China
Relations, Asia Society, USA
Stephen H. Schneider, Melvin & Joan Lane Professor
for Interdisciplinary Environmental Studies, Woods
University, USA
Andreas Schraft, Managing Director, Head Catastrophe
Perils & Treaty Centre, Swiss Re, Switzerland
David Skilling, Associate Principal, McKinsey &
Company, Singapore
Kapil Sibal, Minister of Human Resource Development
of India
Andrew Sorkin, Chief Reporter and Editor, Mergers
and Acquisitions, The New York Times, USA
Andreas Spiegel, Vice-President, Senior Climate
Change Advisor, Swiss Re, Switzerland
Rolf Tanner, Director, Head Political & Sustainability
Risk Management, Swiss Re, Switzerland
Steven M. Tebbe, Vice-President, Environmental
Affairs, NetJets Europe, Portugal
Gillian Tett, Assistant Editor, Markets, The Financial
Times, United Kingdom
David Tuckett, Professor, Psychoanalysis Unit,
Research Department of Clinical , Educational and
Health Psychology, University College London,
United Kingdom
Shailendra Vyakarnam, Director, Centre for
Entrepreneurial Learning, University of Cambridge,
United Kingdom
Peter Walsh, Partner, Oliver Wyman (MMC), USA
Michael Weissel, Partner, Oliver Wyman (MMC), USA
Geoffrey West, President and Distinguished Professor,
Santa Fe Institute, USA
Martin Weymann, Vice-President, Senior Risk
Manager, Swiss Re, Switzerland
Urs Widmer, Vice-President, Senior Medical Officer,
Swiss Re, Switzerland
Linda Yueh, Fellow in Economics, University of Oxford,
United Kingdom
Simon Zadek, Chief Executive, AccountAbility,
United Kingdom
Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, Director, Yale Center
for the Study of Globalization, Yale University, USA
Kaspar Zellweger, Vice-President, Senior Risk
Manager, Swiss Re, Switzerland
Internal Reviewers
Jennifer Blanke, Director, Head of the Global
Competitiveness Network, World Economic Forum
Robert Greenhill, Chief Business Officer, World
Economic Forum
Adrian Monck, Managing Director, Communications
and Media Relations, World Economic Forum
Richard Samans, Managing Director, World
Economic Forum
André Schneider, Managing Director and Chief
Operating Officer, World Economic Forum

48 | Global Risks 2010

Kristel Van der Elst, Director, Head of Scenario
Planning, World Economic Forum
Dominic Waughrey, Senior Director, Head of
Environmental Initiatives, World Economic Forum
Online visualization development for the Risk
Interconnections Map (RIM)
Moritz Stefaner, Research Assistant on the MACE
Project, Potsdam University of Applied Sciences;
Freelance Information Visualizer
We would like to recognize Miguel Perez, Nomination
Manager, Global Leadership Fellow, World Economic
Forum, for his valuable collaboration on the Global
Risks Perception Survey and visualization project.

Members of the Global Agenda Councils on
Chronic Disease & Conditions
We would particularly like to thank the following
people for their valuable assistance and input on the
section on chronic diseases in this report:
Sania Nishtar, Founding President, Heartfile, Pakistan
Ala Alwan, Assistant Director-General,
Noncommunicable Diseases and Mental Health, World
Health Organization (WHO), Switzerland
Eva Jané-Llopis, Head, Chronic diseases and
Wellness, World Economic Forum, Switzerland
Peter Anderson, Regional Editor, Europe, Drug and
Alcohol Review, Netherlands
Gustavo Averbuj, Chief Executive Officer, Ketchum,
Argentina
Cary Cooper, Professor of Organisational Psychology
and Health, Lancaster University Management School
(LUMS), United Kingdom
Oliver Harrison, Director, Public Health and Health
Policy, Government of Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
Helen Herrman, Secretary for Publications, World
Psychiatric Association, Australia
Martin RJ Knapp, Director, Personal Social Services
Research Unit, London School of Economics and
Political Science, United Kingdom
Paul Litchfield, Chief Medical Officer and Head, Health
and Safety, BT, United Kingdom
Rachel Nugent, Deputy Director, Global Health, Center
for Global Development, USA
Michael P. O’Donnell, Editor-in-Chief American Journal
of Health Promotion, USA
Vikram Patel, Professor of International Mental Health,
Sangath, India
Scott Ratzan, Vice-President, Global Health,
Government Affairs and Policy, Johnson & Johnson, USA
K. Srinath Reddy, President, Public Health Foundation
of India (PHFI), India

Expert Consultation at the ECOSOC High-Level
Segment of the 2009 Annual Ministerial Review,
Geneva, July 2009
Fiona Adshead, Director Chronic Diseases
Programmes, World Health Organization (WHO),
Switzerland
Douglas Bettcher, Director, Tobacco Free Initiative,
World Health Organization (WHO), Switzerland
Francesco Branca, Director Nutrition for Health and
Development, World Health Organization (WHO),
Switzerland
James Hospedales, Coordinator Chronic diseases,
Pan American Health Organization (PAHO),
Washington DC, USA
Janet Voute, Partnership Advisor, World Health
Organization (WHO), Switzerland

For their collaboration and thought leadership on the
related report: Global Risks Briefing: Biodiversity,
January 2010, we would like to acknowledge:
Will Evison, Senior Associate, Sustainability and
Climate Change; PricewaterhouseCoopers,
United Kingdom
Chris Knight, Assistant Director, Sustainability and
Climate Change, PricewaterhouseCoopers,
United Kingdom
Sophie Lambin, Director of Global Thought
Leadership, PricewaterhouseCoopers, United Kingdom

Global Agenda Council on Chronic Diseases &
Malnutrition, 2008-2009
John Clymer, President, Partnership For Prevention, USA
Sharon Fonn, Head, School of Public Health,
University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa
Stig K. Pramming, Managing Director, Oxford Health
Alliance, United Kingdom
Pekka Puska, Director-General, National Institute for
Health and Welfare (THL), Finland
Ricardo Uauy, President, International Union of
Nutritional Sciences, Chile
Derek Yach, Vice-President, Global Health Policy,
PepsiCo, USA
Biodiversity and Global Risks
We would like to express particular thanks to the
following for their valuable input and support:
Pavan Sukhdev, Study Leader, TEEB and Project
Leader, Green Economy, United Nations Environment
Programme - World Conservation Monitoring Centre
(UNEP-WCMC), United Kingdom
Joshua Bishop, Chief Economist, International Union
for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), Switzerland
(Member GAC on Ecosystems & Biodiversity Loss)
Georgina Langdale, Communications, TEEB Central
Office, Germany
Jason Shellaby, Research Analyst, Global Agenda
Councils Team, World Economic Forum

Global Risks 2010 | 49

The World Economic Forum is an independent
international organization committed to improving
the state of the world by engaging leaders in
partnerships to shape global, regional and
industry agendas.
Incorporated as a foundation in 1971, and based
in Geneva, Switzerland, the World Economic
Forum is impartial and not-for-profit; it is tied to
no political, partisan or national interests.
(www.weforum.org)

WEF_GRR_2010

