COMMITTED TO
IMPROVING THE STATE
OF THE WORLD

Global Risks 2008
A Global Risk Network Report

A World Economic Forum Report
in collaboration with

Citigroup
Marsh & McLennan Companies (MMC)
Swiss Re
Wharton School Risk Center
Zurich Financial Services

World Economic Forum
January 2008

The information in this report, or on which this report is based, has been obtained from sources that the authors believe to
be reliable and accurate. However, it has not been independently verified and no representation or warranty, express or
implied, is made as to the accuracy or completeness of any information obtained from third parties. In addition, the
statements in this report may provide current expectations of future events based on certain assumptions and include any
statement that does not directly relate to a historical fact or a current fact. These statements involve known and unknown
risks, uncertainties and other factors which are not exhaustive. The companies contributing to this report operate in a
continually changing environment and new risks emerge continually. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on
these statements. The companies contributing to this report undertake no obligation to publicly revise or update any
statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise and they shall in no event be liable for any
loss or damage arising in connection with the use of the information in this report.
This work was prepared by the Global Risk Network of the World Economic Forum.
World Economic Forum
91-93 route de la Capite
CH-1223 Cologny/Geneva
Switzerland
Tel.: +41 (0)22 869 1212
Fax: +41 (0)22 786 2744
E-mail: globalrisks@weforum.org
www.weforum.org
© 2008 World Economic Forum
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted
in any form or by any means, including photocopying and recording, or by any
information storage and retrieval system.

REF: 090108

Contents

Introduction

4

Focus on Emerging Issues in Global Risk

6

Assessing Global Risks in 2008

20

Networked World, Networked Risks

25

Financial Markets, Risk Transfer and Risk Mitigation

30

Structuring Mitigation at the State and International Level:
Taking the Country Risk Officer Forward

36

Conclusion

39

Appendix 1: Taxonomy of Global Risk: Trends, Issues of Concern, Risks

41

Appendix 2: Risk Assessments

45

Contributors

52

Participants

53

3

Introduction

Over the last year, a series of risk issues – from the
liquidity crisis in the financial markets to the
emerging concerns over the long-term security of
food supply – have focused global attention on the
fragility of the global system. An awareness of risk
and risk management is increasingly viewed as a
prerequisite for effective control in both the private
and public sectors.
This year will be no different. Uncertainty about the
short- and medium-term future is as high as it has
been for a decade. Economically, the uncertainty
centres on how the global economy will respond to
the spreading liquidity crunch of 2007. The
mispricing of financial risk, a central theme of Global
Risks 2007, may have further to unwind.
Geopolitically, uncertainty is focused on the

4

possibility of an escalation in tensions with Iran and
concerns over the long-term integrity of the states of
Iraq and Afghanistan.
The result of uncertainty could be inaction in dealing
with other, less immediate, global risks. Action to
mitigate climate change, for example, may be put in
danger should the global economy weaken
substantially – even though many of the political,
economic and investment decisions which will shape
the future path of global climate will need to be
made in the next five years. Proactive management
of globalization to ensure its long-term sustainability
may be derailed by the prevailing currents of
uncertainty. But inaction on long-term risks will only
weaken the global capacity to manage future
challenges.

Under conditions of global stress, one core question
of global risk management will become more salient
than ever: who owns the risk? Without a shared
understanding of ownership, achieving the trade-offs
which may be necessary to mitigate global risk
equitably and sustainably will be extremely difficult.
Without clarity on who is responsible for managing
global risk, turning aspirations into actions will be
impossible. Without frameworks which connect
ownership of risk with the responsibility to mitigate it,
and which share the upside and downside of risk
among stakeholders efficiently, the market
mechanisms for managing risk will fail to improve
our aggregate global resilience in the face of
inevitable risk events. And without leadership from
the business and political communities on all of
these issues, we may find our global future shaped
more by risk events than by our power to anticipate,
manage and mitigate them.
The present report looks at global risks from a range
of different perspectives.
The first part of the report focuses on four emerging
issues that are shaping the global risk landscape:
systemic financial risk, food security, supply chains
and the role of energy. On systemic financial risk, we
put current market turmoil in the historical context
and ask how the transformation of the global
financial system over the last two decades may
require us to rethink our expectations and
understanding of systemic risk in the future. On food
security, we discuss how the subject has moved
from the periphery of the global risk landscape to its
centre, and ask whether the world is ready to cope
with the various trade-offs that the new food
economy is generating. On supply chains, we
investigate a potentially hidden set of vulnerabilities
in the global economy to supply chain disruptions.
Finally, on energy, we outline the emergence of a
range of energy-related risks and ask if the world
can move towards secure and sustainable energy.

The second part of the report presents our collective
assessment of global risks in 2008, based on a
revised taxonomy of risk, and building on the
assessments of past years. In the third part, we look
at the methodological hurdles around the
representation of interconnectedness and
demonstrate how risk “squeezing” and
homogenization of risk are changing the way we
perceive risk globally. In the fourth part of the report,
we examine the role of financial markets as tools of
risk transfer and risk mitigation for an increasingly
broad range of global risks. Finally, in the fifth part,
we take forward our discussions on the construction
of risk mitigation coalitions and country risk
management, establishing a set of principles for
country risk management which the Global Risk
Network will develop in 2008-2009.
The Global Risk Network, part of the World
Economic Forum since 2005, will continue to
generate discussion and dialogue between the
corporate and public sectors. In 2008-2009, the
World Economic Forum and partners of the Global
Risk Report – Citigroup, Marsh & McLennan
Companies, Swiss Re, the Wharton School Risk
Center and Zurich Financial Services – will broaden
the participation of the global business and policy
community.

5

1. Focus on Emerging Issues in Global Risk

In Global Risks 2008, the Global Risk Network has
focused on four emerging issues which may
fundamentally shape not only the year ahead, but
the decades to come. These issues – systemic
financial risk, food security, supply chains and the
role of energy – are all central to the functioning of
the world economy and to the well-being of global
society. The risks associated with them cannot be
eliminated. But they can be better understood and
better managed.
Systemic financial risk is the most immediate and,
from the point of view of economic cost, the most
severe. The financial conditions of the past decade
have allowed for an exceptional period of economic
growth and stability. But, with so many potential
consequences of the 2007 liquidity crunch
unresolved, the outlook for the future is more uncertain
at the beginning of 2008 than it was a year ago.
A recession in the United States cannot be excluded
in the year ahead, and economists are divided on
whether domestic-led growth in Asian markets can
drive the global economy. In Europe, the impact of
economic uncertainty may be highly divergent. The
role of the financial sector in the United Kingdom
leaves it particularly vulnerable to financial turmoil,
while large current account deficits in some central
and eastern European economies may prove
increasingly unsustainable in 2008. The resilience of
the export-led growth of other major European
economies may also be brought into question if
disruption in the financial markets spreads more
widely. Over the much longer term, the dollar may
find itself under increasing pressure as the global
reserve currency, undermining the geopolitical
position of the US and foreshadowing the end of a
hegemonic period in global economic history.
Food security, at the nexus of a number of issues
from energy security to climate change and water
scarcity, may be emerging as one of the major risks
of the 21st century. Long- and short-term drivers –
population growth, changing lifestyles, climate
change and the growing use of food crops for
biofuels – may be shifting the world into a period of
more volatile and sustained high prices. The
consequences, particularly for the most vulnerable
communities, may be harsh.

6

Extended supply chains, which have allowed global
economic integration to flourish in the last two
decades, may be concealing increased vulnerability
of the global system to disruptive risks. Geographic
concentrations of risk in economically efficient zones
of production may have improved global welfare, but
are businesses and governments prepared for the
consequences of a risk event in these concentrated
areas?
Finally, this section looks at some of the problems
associated with managing the long-term future of
energy, particularly perceived risks to energy security
and risks from global climate change.
What emerges from discussions is a common
problem: the growing misalignment of risk bearers
under conditions of globalization. In financial
markets, the atomization of risk has generally
allowed far greater participation in the risk economy
and vastly improved financial diversification, but it
may also have resulted in a systemic underappreciation of risk. For the food economy, shifts
towards policies perceived to improve domestic
energy security – such as an increased use of
biofuels – and risks associated with water and
climate change may be shifting power and
resources to crop producers and some developed
economies at the expense of global equity. In global
supply chains, dangerous accumulations of risk may
not be recognized and, yet, may threaten a systemic
crisis should one part of the supply chain fail. Finally,
the mismatch between incentives for fundamental
changes in the global energy economy – between
developed and developing countries and between
different elements of the private and public sectors –
is complicating the emergence of global solutions.
This underscores the necessity to improve
understanding of how risks interconnect, how we
can build coalitions to manage risk, and how the
different trade-offs between risk mitigation solutions
can be appropriately identified. Our main conclusion
is the need for the governance of globalization to
enhance efficiency, ensure equity and manage a
global risk environment which is both more complex
and more challenging than ever before.

A. Systemic financial risk: do we
understand it, can we mitigate it?

What is systemic financial risk?
In general terms, the manifestation of systemic
financial risk involves a system-wide financial
crisis, typically accompanied by a sharp decline in
asset values and economic activity. In all cases,
systemic financial risk involves the spread of
instability throughout the financial system as a
whole with results that are sufficient to affect the
real economy.
Manifestations of systemic financial crisis are
relatively rare. In the past 20 years, systemic
financial risk events have included the equity crash
of October 1987 (“Black Monday”), the Japanese
asset price collapse of the 1990s, the Asian
financial crisis of 1997 and the Russian default
of 1998 (which led to the demise of the LongTerm Capital Management (LTCM) hedge fund).
Each of these episodes was characterized by an
abrupt loss of liquidity, discontinuous market
moves, extreme volatility, sharp increases in
correlations and contagion across markets, and
systemic instability. While the pathways of
contagion of systemic financial risk are often well
understood in retrospect, and the conditions for
a systemic financial risk event may be well
identified ahead of crisis, the precise triggering
event is rarely predicted. Systemic risk is an
inherent element of the global financial system.
The increasing complexity of financial markets, and the
rate at which financial markets are evolving, make the
task of avoiding and managing systemic financial risk
extremely difficult. Increasing global interconnectedness
has multiplied the possible pathways for the
contagion of financial risk. Layers of leverage may
have increased the possibility for magnification of
risk. Financial innovation, in the form of complex
financial instruments, may ultimately contribute to
the opacity of systemic risk. At the same time,
however, the increasing importance of the financial
sector in the real economy has made the question of
systemic financial risk more important than ever.

This section of the report discusses the key drivers,
characteristics and impacts of systemic financial
risk, which private financial institutions,
governments, regulatory authorities and central
banks will need to integrate into their approaches to
markets if they are to identify and survive the next
systemic financial crisis.

Mispricing risk: the underlying
seeds of crisis
At the beginning of 2007, the economic mood was
generally positive. The consensus pointed to a year
of continued strong global economic growth. Risk
premiums were at historically low levels. In
hindsight, the widespread complacency with
respect to the true nature of risk served only to
confirm the weakness of financial markets in
predicting systemic crisis.
But there were identifiable “weak signals” which
suggested the potential for financial crisis. An asset
price collapse was the top risk identified in Global
Risks 2007. Warnings voiced by the Bank of
International Settlements were ignored, while a
Global Risk Network briefing issued in January 2007
warned that a global re-appreciation of risk could be
expected, with three major challenges to the global
economy: a housing recession, the beginning of a
liquidity crunch and high oil prices.
All three were realized over the course of 2007. First,
the US housing recession, which began in late 2006,
has accelerated, with new housing construction at
its lowest level since the early 1990s and house
prices down nationally. Second, the world has
experienced a crunch in global liquidity, affecting

7

even essentially solvent financial institutions, and
raising the prospect of tightening credit as banks are
forced to readjust their capital ratios. Finally, the
dollar price of oil rose to an all-time high, close to
the inflation-adjusted peak of the early 1980s.
But if an eventual global re-appreciation of risk was
foreseeable in early 2007, the timing and precise
nature of the trigger event was not.
In early 2007 many expected that any systemic
crisis would be the consequence of an unwinding of
global economic imbalances – notably the US
current account deficit. The actual trigger for the
current systemic crisis was the collapse of a critical
segment of the US mortgage business – the subprime mortgage market. It was widely thought in
early 2007 that the main threats to financial stability
would come from leveraged hedge funds. But it
turned out to be problems related to complex
security structures and off-balance-sheet vehicles
created by the banking sector that have generated
the systemic elements to the current crisis.
Predicting what will happen is easier than predicting
when and how events will unfold.

supervisors and central banks. Financial crises may
never be avoided. But their frequency and severity
may be significantly reduced.
Is the financial system now more stable and
resilient? Some recent experiences – such as the
relatively benign Y2K rollover, the very short-lived
market disruption following the events of 9/11, and
the relatively muted effects of more recent spikes in
the dollar price of oil – have led experts to conclude
that markets are now more resilient to exogenous
shocks. But many would argue that the overall
resilience of the global financial system will only
become fully evident under conditions of severe
stress over the next year.

A system transformed
Over the last 20 years, financial markets have
undergone a revolution, driven by deregulation, a
rapid pace of financial innovation, global financial
integration and the increasing role of the financial
sector in the economy.
The salient features of the transformation can be
summarized in six points.

Liquidity crunch: history repeats itself?
The meltdown of the US sub-prime mortgage
market and the growing prospect of a global credit
crunch dominated financial markets in the second
half of 2007. An abrupt evaporation of liquidity and
dramatic repricing of risk led to widespread financial
instability, ultimately threatening the viability of
smaller financial institutions even in well-regulated
markets such as Germany and the United Kingdom.
The US Federal Reserve has projected direct losses
related to sub-prime of US$ 150 billion; non-subprime financial losses may be considerably greater.
As in past systemic financial crises, complacency in
credit standards – driven by perverse incentives and
moral hazard – lowered risk premiums to
unsustainable levels. The periodic underpricing of
risk in financial markets may be structural and to
some extent unavoidable. But few systemic financial
crises are entirely dissimilar to earlier episodes. This
suggests room for improvement in the management
of crisis including better early warning systems and
more coordinated and forceful action by market

8

• Deregulation: The process of deregulation has
deeply affected the financial markets of advanced
economies by removing barriers to entry;
reducing artificial borders between types of
financial institutions; increasing cross-border
competition; encouraging the emergence of large,
complex financial institutions; and spurring
financial innovation.
• Financial innovation: There has been an
explosion in derivative and structured products.
Such innovations have allowed for more efficient
allocation of financial resources. Many argue that
this has helped strengthen the global financial
system by better apportioning risk. However,
innovation raises challenges in terms of evaluating
risk, correctly identifying ultimate bearers of risk and
assessing whether they can manage it. Rating
asset classes without market history has put rating
agencies in a crucial position in global markets.
Regulators may not have the capacity to monitor
the range of risks within the financial system. And
even as Basel II comes into force, regulation may
not be evolving as fast as market innovation.

• Rise of alternative capital pools: The rise of
hedge funds, private equity and sovereign wealth
funds has changed the balance of the global
financial system. Hedge funds are sometimes
highly leveraged (with consequently higher risk
profiles) with shorter investment time horizons
than standard investors, operating under
conditions of reduced disclosure and oversight.
Private equity firms, while often investing for the
longer term, are similarly unburdened by
regulatory oversight, and sometimes highly
leveraged. Sovereign wealth funds, which have
become particularly important as rising oil prices
and global economic imbalances have massively
increased the foreign reserves of certain
countries, present a new set of challenges,
including relative lack of transparency over
investment strategies, concern over possible
political intervention and potential large-scale
market moves.
• Financial services convergence: The borders
between different types of financial institutions are
becoming blurred, increasing risk transfer between
them. Banks are supplying capital for insurance
risks, while both banks and reinsurers are using
insurance-linked securities (see page 32) to
transfer insurance risks to the capital markets.
• Role of non-bank institutions and
intermediaries: The increased role of market
intermediaries may have widened the offering of
structured financial products to investors. But not
all intermediaries are subject to consolidated riskbased capital frameworks or the full complement
of supervisory constraints. The originate-todistribute (OTD) model may have lowered
underwriting standards while the growing
importance of credit rating agencies – which play
a key role in pricing risk but which do not hold it
themselves – may raise similar challenges with
respect to incentives.
• Shift to multipolar currency regime: While the
US dollar remains the global reserve currency and
is likely to remain so for years to come, over time
the creation of the euro and the growing
importance of emerging country currencies will
lead to a weakening of the dollar’s dominance,
with consequences for the global management of
central banks’ reserve holdings and the resolution
of currency alignments.

What are the implications of these changes
for the nature of systemic financial risk?
When considering the implications of these changes
for systemic financial risk, three major observations
stand out:
• Risk ownership has been decentralized: The
growth of securitization and risk transfer has led to
risks being disaggregated and spread to diverse
owners. This demands a shift in emphasis from
the widely studied and understood “bank run”
model of systemic risk to a new “market-based”
model, where financial crises manifest themselves
in markets rather than institutions; though of
course institutions must still be monitored.
• Risk transmission has become more
important: Increasing interconnectedness has
multiplied the points of potential failure and
increased the significance of systemic linkages.
Behavioural dynamics are critical. One example of
the importance of risk transmission is the carry
trade where there is potential for large, abrupt
reversals of cross-border capital flows which
could trigger systemic crisis.
• Risk management is critical: Complexity has
increased the need for effective risk management.
At the enterprise level, there is rising adoption of
enterprise risk management. At the national and
international level, increasing attention is paid to
financial and political coordination.
On balance, these developments appear to have
increased the financial system’s capacity to assume
and distribute risk, and they also appear to have
made it more stable. More risk is apportioned to
market participants who have indicated a willingness
to absorb risk. But, as recent developments
highlight, this appears only to be true under “normal”
market conditions. The complexity and near infinite
feedback loops of the modern financial system have
exposed it to a small risk of very large systemic
shocks. Some analysts postulate that the financial
system may indeed be more pro-cyclical if the
growing dispersion of risk is not coupled with a
better understanding of the driving factors of risk
segmentation and diversification.

9

Anatomy of a Systemic Financial Crisis

A triggering shock – either
real or financial – initiates
a decline in asset prices

Apprehension

Panic/contagion

Liquidity evaporates as
crowded trades and asset fire
sales overrun arbitrageurs
(limits of arbitrage)

Fear/repricing
of risk

Credit crunch as escalation
of credit concerns leads to
position liquidations, margin
calls and de-leveraging

Note: Whatever the proximate cause of a systemic financial crisis, the anatomy of apprehension, fear and contagion is common to most.
Source: World Economic Forum

Hence, we may be facing a paradox: while the
financial system has been made more efficient and
stable in normal times, it is now also more prone to
excessive instability in really bad times. At the same
time, the increased importance of the financial sector in
the global economy means that the impact of financial
instability on the real economy has also increased.

Pathways to catastrophic failure
All the trends above can be observed in the recent
turmoil in financial markets.
The ensuing liquidity freeze and broad-based asset
write-downs indicate that many existing risk models
were inadequate, failing to reflect the dynamic

Open questions on systemic financial risk
• What types of systemic propagation mechanisms might result in a small shock becoming a major
financial crisis?
• How can negative or self-reinforcing feedback loops (such as bank runs) be interrupted or short-circuited?
• What is the role of central banks in an environment where lending activities are performed by many
unregulated market participants?
• To what extent does the mandate to forestall and defuse financial crises introduce moral hazard and
underinvestment in management of market and liquidity risks?
• What potential avenues for cross-pollination exist to identify useful concepts and mitigation models from
other domains?
• What role will the emerging giants of China and India play in the international financial system?
• Will market-driven, regulatory and supervisory approaches be sufficient, or is more regulatory oversight
required? And how could private sector initiatives supplement these?
• What is the role of credit rating agencies in financial stability, if any?

10

complexity and unpredictable nature of financial
crises. Statements to the effect that 10-standard
deviation events were occurring several days in a
row demonstrate how much is still to be learned
about the underlying distributions, and so-called
“tail” events, which refer to the extremes of a
probability distribution.

It may not make sense to attempt to eliminate risks
which ultimately represent a source of opportunity as
well as hazard. Rendering the global financial system
as flexible and resilient as possible by improving
early indicators, enforcing more stress testing,
enhancing understanding of tail risk and requiring
better contingency planning may be more effective.

New thinking may be urgently required.

Ultimately, strategies to deal with systemic financial
risk must reflect the fundamental shift in the global
financial system to a market-driven model. There is
considerable scope for increased public and private
sector collaboration on stress testing, liquidity
management, risk assessment and prevention. One
example is the formation of the Counterparty Risk
Management Policy Group in the wake of the
collapse of Long-term Capital Management, which
has helped to reduce risks stemming from hedge
fund leverage.

Conventional wisdom emphasizes, in equal
measure, the two components of risk: likelihood and
severity. This naturally drives risk ratings,
prioritization and corrective actions focused both on
prevention (i.e. reducing likelihood of the event) and
mitigation (i.e. reducing severity of the event).
But changes in the financial markets, while providing
many benefits, have also created new and
unforeseen risks which may be more susceptible to
exogenous shocks (such as geopolitical risk) or
internal factors (such as speculative bubbles). Many
of these risks are unpredictable, making prevention
and mitigation impossible.

11

B. Food security: the emerging risk of
the 21st century?
In 2007, prices for many staple foods reached
record levels. The price of corn in late 2007 was
50% higher than 12 months previously. The price of
wheat was double. Global food reserves are at their
lowest in 25 years and, as a result, world food
supply is vulnerable to an international crisis or
natural disaster.
Food security has emerged as a major risk, marked
by both local and global consequences, trade-offs
between different mitigation priorities and a
disproportionate impact on poorer communities.
Embedded in a web of other global risks, there is
considerable uncertainty as to whether food
insecurity in 2007 is the result of short-term
conditions which have existed in various times
throughout history, or whether a more fundamental
change is taking place, with a range of underlying
trends bringing food from the sidelines to the centre
of the global risk discussion in years to come.

What is food security?
According to the Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO), food security is achieved when all people, at
all times, have physical and economic access to
sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet their

dietary needs and food preferences for an active
and healthy life. Food security, similar to energy
security, is not only about avoiding physical
disruptions to supply, but also about ensuring supply
at a price which allows economic activity and wellbeing to flourish.

Impacts are global and varied
In the past, food security generally concerned the
least developed countries, particularly those in
conflict and those facing uncertain weather patterns.
But, more recently, concerns about sustainable food
security have spread to developed countries which
have not generally considered themselves exposed
to food insecurity. For example, the United Kingdom
has historically relied on the depth of international
markets to ensure food supplies at a reasonable

Food Security: At the Nexus of a Range of Global Risks

More frequent and
severe heatwaves

Oil and gas prices

Food security
Interstate and
civil wars

Reduction in Chinese
economic growth

Declining quality and
quantity of water
Source: World Economic Forum

12

Rising Food Prices, Unequal Impacts
(food weighting within consumer price index, percent)
80
Bangladesh
70
Nigeria
60
Afganistan

50
40

Kenya

Russia

30
20
10

India

China

Brazil
US

UK

0
0

1

2

3
4
5
Per capita income (in log)

6

7

8

Note: Poor people tend to spend relatively more of their income on food, and therefore suffer more when food prices go up.
Source: International Monetary Fund

price, but this model may be put under stress in the
future. In 2007, food and drink prices rose at their
fastest rate in 14 years, at 4.7%. In the US, food
prices were up 4.4% year-over-year at the end of
2007 – double the rate of non-food, non-energy
inflation – partially due to increased acreage devoted
to corn to make ethanol.
China and India are also exposed to pressures on
global food security, and their domestic experiences
may have global economic consequences. In China,
average incomes have barely risen while food prices
have soared: by 17.6% overall, 70% for pork
products, 30% for vegetables and 34% for cooking oil.
Combined with the sharply rising dollar price of oil, high
food prices in China could increase global inflation.
Beyond the potential economic consequences of
rising food prices is the well-established relationship
between food prices and political stability. In 2007,
surging prices of basic foods caused domestic
unrest in a number of different countries. In March,
thousands of Mexicans demonstrated against the
four-fold increase in the price of flat corn. In

September, Italians organized a one-day strike
against rising pasta prices. In October, in West
Bengal (India), food riots erupted as a result of
disputes over food rationing.
In some countries, particularly where the success of
government has been historically linked to
administrative control of basic supplies,
governments have intervened to limit the political
consequences of rising food prices. The Russian
government acted to control prices of staple foods
ahead of the December 2007 parliamentary
elections. In Egypt, which experienced political
upheaval in the wake of price increases of bread in
1977, subsidies to bread producers have been
increased to mitigate the impact of rising global
wheat prices. In China, soybean import duties have
been reduced, subsidies to farmers have been
boosted to encourage agricultural production –
particularly of pork and milk – and plans are to
provide support for low-income urban residents
against food price increases.

13

The drivers: population, biofuels
and climate change
Global population and changes in lifestyle
The United Nations has predicted the global population
will rise above 9 billion by 2050, placing additional
pressure on the global food supply. But these
pressures are sharply accentuated by an increasing
demand in developing countries for protein-rich foods
which require more grain (and water) to produce, and
by the increasing constraint of available agricultural
land. Annual per capita consumption of meat in
China has increased from 10 kilograms in 1950 to
40 today. Over the same time period, the availability
of arable farmland per head of global population has
declined from one acre to half that. Many experts
believe that for these reasons increases in the price
of food are likely to be sustained.
Food or fuel: how biofuel production may
impact food security
The use of crops to manufacture biofuels is
increasing globally – often with support of
governments aiming to reduce carbon emissions or
to reduce dependence on imported sources of
energy. Biofuels are on course to consume up to
30% of the US corn crop by 2010.
Over the long term, the growing importance of
biofuels has prompted fears that the dynamics of
the energy economy will be introduced into global
food markets, dramatically increasing price volatility,
particularly of staple foods. But, even over the short
term, the use of crops for biofuels raises a number
of complex trade-offs common to the management
of many global risks.
The first of these concerns global equity: any shift
from food production to biofuel production has
different consequences for different communities.
Crop exporters may benefit, as may communities
where food expenditure is a minor part of overall
expenditure. But others may suffer, from crop
importers − including agricultural communities which
import grain as feed for animals – to poorer
communities where food purchased on the open
market is a major component of overall expenditure.

14

The second concerns the trade-off between global
efficiency and perceptions of energy security: while
global efficiency would best be served by a marketdetermined allocation of crop resources globally to
food and biofuels based on price and relative
environmental efficiency, concerns over energy security
may undermine the attractiveness of global
collaboration. Not all techniques for manufacturing
biofuels are equally efficient in terms of reducing
aggregate carbon emissions. It is often a perceived
national security imperative, rather than a global
imperative to reduce carbon emissions, which is
driving the frameworks in which biofuels are being
produced.
Climate change
Climate change alone is forecast to increase the
number of undernourished people globally by between
40 million and 170 million in 2100, according to
forecasts by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC). Climate change may affect agricultural
production by increasing the severity of weather
events, by increasing the volatility of weather and by
shifting rainfall patterns. Changing rainfall patterns
could mean that in just over a decade, raindependent areas of South Asia and Africa could be
producing half their current agricultural yield.

The result: uncertainty
The consequences of all these trends for
perpetuating the escalation of food prices are
difficult to predict. Some experts expect higher food
prices to be sustained. Others believe that markets
will gradually readjust to shortages as higher prices
make it profitable again to grow crops for food.
Policy-makers may have to return to thinking about
food as a strategic asset and begin to modify food
policies. Given the amount of uncertainty, the
resilience of the world’s food system will be severely
tested in the next few years.

C. Hyper-optimization and supply
chain vulnerability: an invisible
global risk?
Economic globalization has transformed the
operational structures of both business and
government. Outsourcing – particularly of
manufacturing but increasingly of standard business
services – has been a major driver of global
prosperity by allocating scarce global resources to
businesses and geographies with a comparative
advantage to produce particular goods and services
most efficiently. Improvements in technology and
global logistics, and reductions in trade barriers have
all facilitated the integration of previously separate
regional economies. As a result, international and
intra-regional trade has expanded at a faster rate
than the global economy over the last 20 years.
But, as the global economy has become more
integrated, vulnerability to disruption of the supply
chains which hold the global economy together may
have increased. Resilience is no longer just about
internal management.

A global issue
All companies and governments dependent on
external suppliers are exposed to the risks of
disruption in their supply chain. But the extent and
complexity of current global supply chains mean that
the problem of supply chain management is not
limited to a single enterprise or industry: even a
relatively small supply chain disruption caused by a
global risk event may ultimately have consequences
across the global economic system.
The economic optimization of supply chains, with
the geographic concentration of risk as a frequent
corollary, has enhanced the systemic vulnerability to
a supply chain failure. In September 1999, global
semiconductor prices nearly doubled following an
earthquake in Taiwan, China, a key centre for supply.
Supply chains frequently appear to disperse risk
between multiple parties, but they can also, as in this
case, lead to an unrecognized aggregation of risk.
Effective preparation and management of supply
chains may prevent the contagion of global risks and
limit the consequences of a localized risk event. But

mismanagement of supply chains may result in them
serving as a transmission mechanism of global risk,
amplifying the disruptive impacts of a local risk event
at the systemic level and producing consequences
far beyond the corporate sector. A crisis in the
supply chain of a private sector manufacturer of
vaccines, for example, could rapidly develop into a
public health crisis, particularly in the context of the
ongoing global risk of pandemics and infectious
diseases. Building a culture of supply chain risk
management across public and private sectors may
be a first step to broader global risk mitigation.
However, despite their importance both at the level
of individual enterprises and at the level of the global
economic system, vulnerabilities to the supply chain
are generally poorly understood and managed. This
is partly because the risks in the supply chain are
obscured, as enterprises and governments may be
indirectly exposed to a global risk disruption through
a complex range of sub-supplier arrangements. But
in some measure this is due to the range of possible
global risk disruptions – from geopolitical risk to a
natural catastrophe to pandemics. A US- or
European-based company which sources key
components from Asia will indirectly face risks that
they may never encounter domestically, as well as
very different cultural approaches to the management
of risk. Conversely, a recent survey conducted by
Marsh Inc. on 62 companies based in Asia found
that only 21% had full business continuity plans to
protect against business interruption arising from
events such as natural disasters or terrorist attacks.
Given the complexity and interdependency of global
risks, developing a realistic and effective risk
management and mitigation strategy can be
daunting. However, there are measures that can be
taken to better understand the volatility of supply
chains and to reduce the impact of global risk
transmission through supply chains at the enterprise
and national level.
At the enterprise level, the first step is to understand
the value added in each stage of the supply chain
and to assess the risk to delivery of this value. A
risk-return perspective – based on profit, revenue or
reputational considerations – will support
management prioritization and deliver the greatest
return on investment. A thorough view of the supply

15

chain, from sourcing of raw materials to customer
fulfilment, will provide a clearer view of key
vulnerabilities and risk concentrations. This should
be coupled with an assessment of how these affect
the supply chain in terms of recovery time or extra
cost implications.
A comprehensive assessment and/or quantification
of the risk in the supply chain will facilitate evaluation
and prioritization of proposed risk transfer, financing
and mitigation strategies. For example, a certain
level of loss that could arise from one of these risks
may be acceptable given the firm’s balance sheet
and risk appetite. Hence, no risk mitigation is
required. It is also possible that the risk level could
be increased, e.g. by reducing the buffer inventory,
thus facilitating cost savings. If the risk is
unacceptable however, then a firm could opt to

increase buffer inventory, arrange alternative or
back-up suppliers in different countries, or work with
suppliers to improve their own business continuity
and resiliency planning and thus the firm’s own
supply chain integrity. Whichever option is chosen, it
should be influenced by understanding the riskreturn of different options, and the corporate
strategy and risk appetite of the business.
But, ultimately, effective management of global risks
requires a collaborative and coordinated approach in
public-private partnership at an international level.
Given the macroeconomic and microeconomic
impact of supply disruptions arising from a range of
global risks, improved dialogue and policy on these
risks is crucial to the effective management of the
global economy. This could also be facilitated by a
forum of country risk officers, suggested on page 36.

Managing Global Supply Chains: External and Internal Management

Note: Identifying critical dependencies in the supply chain, vulnerabilities to disruption and the risk threshold of the organization is the first step to
managing global supply chains. But there are both internal responses and proactive external responses which need to be considered. Less traditional
external management of risks may ultimately be more efficient.
Source: Marsh & McLennan Companies (MMC)

16

D. Energy and global risk:
interconnected risks, disconnected
incentives?
Energy is a key input to the global economy, but its
safe, secure and sustainable provision is increasingly
problematic. At the nexus of a number of different
global risks – including climate change, economic and
some geopolitical risks – current and future policy
decisions about energy will inevitably shape the
overall global risk landscape. But the incentives in
place to reform the global energy economy in a way
which reduces global risk holistically are not in place.

Outline of the risks
Last year saw an increase in oil prices close to the
inflation-adjusted peak of the 1980s. There is
considerable uncertainty in the long term over supply
and demand. But over the 10-year horizon of this
report there are few reasons to believe that energy
prices will fall significantly – and there are several
reasons to believe that energy prices may rise.

In the immediate term, the tightness of global
markets has accentuated vulnerability to a supply
interruption. Over the next 10 years, the International
Energy Agency has identified the risk of a far sharper
supply-side crunch as investment in updating energy
infrastructure fails to keep pace with demand.
Capital expenditure required is estimated at US$
11.6 trillion to 2030, but uncertainty over future
returns and future regulatory frameworks around
greenhouse gas emissions has meant that such
investment may not be forthcoming. The
International Energy Agency has predicted a 37%
rise in demand for oil to 116 million barrels per day
(bpd) by 2030, but investment in exploration has
fallen and many experts suggest that oil production
is unlikely to exceed 100 million bpd.
The global economy has demonstrated remarkable
resilience to increases in energy prices since 2004.
But the limits of resilience may be close to being
reached. The easiest gains in energy efficiency are
likely to already have been realized. Moreover, the
financial conditions which have prevailed in recent
years – abundant liquidity, itself a partial

Matrix of Impacts of Global Risk Events on the Oil and Gas Industry
Economic cost
Reduction in GDP ($bn)
1 100
Long

China slowdown

O&G supply disrupted

Pandemic
contagious by air

900
Short

Short

Climate change

700
Health major crises
500

Blockade only - long

300

Iran – US war
Blockade only - short

SARS spreads
US$ crisis

Multiple 100
attacks
-100

Terrorist attack
Air single attack

-300

Industry gain

Oil & Gas industry cost
Profit pool reduction

Industry loss

Note: Assessments of impact are derived from a number of different global risk scenarios developed for the oil and gas industry by Marsh &
McLennan Inc.

17

consequence of financial surpluses in energyexporting countries resulting from high prices – have
changed. Not only has the risk of higher energy
prices increased but, potentially, the vulnerability of
the global economy.
At the same time, the objectives of secure,
reasonably priced energy and reductions in
emissions of greenhouse gases (GHG) seem both
out of reach and in conflict.
Coal, the only cheap, widely available fossil fuel, is
linked with carbon emissions which will be
unsustainable environmentally without carbon
capture and storage technologies. The world’s major
oil reserves are located in regions of geopolitical
instability. Gas, the cleanest fossil fuel, is difficult to
transport and is increasingly viewed as a political
bargaining chip by some major supplier states.
Nuclear power, probably the best option for carbonneutral energy from the perspective of currently
available and easily scaleable technologies,
continues to cause anxiety given problems of waste
disposal, fear of nuclear accidents and questions on the
desirability of the global spread of nuclear technologies.
Public policy has focused on green technologies
such as wind power and biofuels. But these
technologies come with their own problems, notably
scalability. As discussed above, the use of crops for
biofuels may promote greater insecurity for other
crucial resources: food and water.
Globally, energy supplies are less secure even as
emissions of greenhouse gases continue to rise.
And the global risks continue to be strongly on the
downside.

Can the world move towards secure and
sustainable energy?
Such an outcome is possible, but it requires policymakers to confront their constituencies with difficult
trade-offs and requires a major shift in thinking about
risk and how dialogue on risk sharing can be
established. One key issue, highlighted elsewhere in
the current report, is the inherent mismatch between
those who bear risk and reward. Without alignment of
interests and alignment of risk and reward, building
complex coalitions to manage global risks will be difficult.

18

The disparity between the impact of global risks on
different sectors of society and the economy can be
seen with reference to the impact of an oil price
shock. At the simplest and most immediate level,
such a shock would essentially be positive for oil
and gas producers, but negative for the broader
global economy.
The matrix shows an analysis of the impact of a
number of risk events using the oil and gas sector
as an example. Results for the electricity sector show
a similar pattern of disparate impact. One striking
output from the graph below is the aggregate GDP
cost of a disruption of oil or gas supply – reflected in
the overall Global Risk rating of a steep rise in oil or
gas prices as one of the most salient risks for 2008
– compared to the potential (short-term) benefits for
the oil and gas industry. The mismatch between
gains and losses at the industry/aggregate level, as
well as the national/international level makes risk
management extremely complex.
But many of the more interesting impacts are
subtler: for example, the power sector in both
Europe and the US is delaying investments
necessary to replace an ageing fleet of power
stations because of uncertainty on future regulation
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Underinvestment today increases the likelihood of
future power shortages, and consequently of future
high prices for electrical power.
Meanwhile, failure to develop a clear holistic policy
approach to management of both energy security
and reducing carbon emissions may end up
threatening both objectives. At present, the
European Union appears to be drifting into high
dependence on gas from a single source, high
investment in renewable energy technologies that
may not offer the scalability necessary to achieve
ambitious targets of reductions in carbon emissions,
and a highly differentiated approach to nuclear
power. Should the current situation continue, it is
almost inevitable that the European Union will be
vulnerable to future energy shortages and will fail to
achieve its stated goals for reductions in carbon
emissions. The situation in the US, while different, is
no better: high investment in biofuel production may
bring its own risks, while dependence on foreign
energy supplies continues.

The next few years will be crucial for determining a
long-term global strategy on many of these issues,
as a successor agreement to the Kyoto protocol is
negotiated, as major investment decisions will have
to be made on energy infrastructures in producer
countries, as political changes may drive shifts in
energy policy in the developed world, and as the
emerging economies of Asia become increasingly
attached to particular energy sources.
Better dialogue is needed at all levels – between
emerging and developed countries and between the
corporate sector and the government and regulators
– so that the current misalignments of incentives can
be addressed effectively. Energy security has two
sides, and both producers and consumers have
much to gain from predictability. Similarly, to unlock
investment and innovation in cleaner energy, longterm economic viability must be assured by forwardlooking regulatory frameworks and, ultimately, an
economic price for carbon. Whether or not such
policy changes are forthcoming at the global and
national level, individual companies and the energy
industry need to improve their capacity to link their
own risk management and strategic decisions.

19

2. Assessing Global Risks in 2008

The global risk landscape at the beginning of 2008
is broadly similar to the risk landscape at the
beginning of 2007. Many of the risks have remained
stable in terms of the ratings ascribed to them by
the Global Risk Network for likelihood and severity. A
number of risks have been sharpened in definition,
others have been disaggregated and one new risk –
food security – has been identified. The taxonomy of

Economic risks: The main shift between the
outlook in early 2007 and the outlook in early 2008
has been a major re-appreciation of risk over the
course of 2007 as many of the mismatches
highlighted in Global Risks 2007 have begun to
unwind. The trade-weighted exchange rate of the
US dollar has fallen, and the risks of a further
sharp fall have edged up. Oil prices have continued
to rise to close to inflation-adjusted peaks –

risk, separating trends of issues of concern from
risks themselves, has allowed for a more granular
approach to assessment. (This is available in
Appendix 2 of the current report.) The graphics on
the following pages should be read in conjunction
with a description of what has and has not changed
over the past year.

increasing vulnerability to a supply-side shock – but
the world has demonstrated remarkable resilience
in absorbing higher prices. From a relatively positive
picture of the stability of the world economy in early
2007, the world is entering 2008 under conditions
of considerable economic uncertainty. The
possibility of a US recession has undoubtedly
increased, but there is considerable debate as to
how this would impact global prosperity.

ECONOMIC
• Rising and volatile prices create significant
shortages for poor people globally (those
whose consumption basket is more than 50%
food).
• Oil or gas prices rise steeply due to a major
supply disruption (decreased global supply of
10% for several months).
• An abrupt, major fall in the value of the US
dollar with impacts throughout the financial
system.

• Domestic social/political issues combine to slow
Chinese growth to 6% or less (sustained over
time).
• Declining fiscal positions force multiple
governments of wealthy countries to raise
taxes, leading to economic stagnation.
• House and other asset prices collapse in the
US, United Kingdom and continental Europe,
reducing consumer spending and creating a
recession.

Geopolitical risks: Geopolitical risks remain
broadly divided into three categories: geoeconomic, structural shifts and regional instability.
On the geo-economic side the main risks are
associated with a potential retrenchment from
globalization, whether from growing protectionism
in the developed world or from political pressures
in the developing world. Political risk has returned
to the management of the global economy in a
major way in recent years, and that trend looks set
to continue. In terms of structural shifts, the
pressures for change on the post-1945 model of

global governance will continue to complicate
moves to improve global governance of global
risks, either in terms of security or management of
financial imbalances. Finally, the focal points of
global geopolitical risk – Afghanistan, Iran and Iraq
– are likely to continue to engage the world in
2008. The possibilities for positive game-changing
developments, such as peace between Israelis
and Palestinians, are always present. But few
experts predict that the geopolitical picture will
change significantly for the better in 2008.

20

GEOPOLITICS
• International terrorists mount multiple attacks
with conventional and chemical (but not
nuclear) weapons, causing significant economic
and human losses and exacerbating the
retrenchment from globalization.
• Collapse of the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT)
leads to multiple states simultaneously pursuing
nuclear technologies and weaponization, with
associated increase in geopolitical tensions
dragging on the global economy.
• US/Iran conflict.
• US/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
conflict.
• Nation building in Afghanistan fails, providing
haven for international terrorist groups and
triggering the decline of the Pakistani state.
• Disorder in the Horn of Africa worsens as
multiple states descend into conflict and offer
haven for terrorist groups.
• A fragile Latin American regime collapses
suddenly, spreading political and economic
uncertainty throughout the region.

• Penetration of organized crime in the global
economy increases significantly over a 10-year
period, weakening state authority, worsening
the investment climate and slowing growth.
• Multiple developed economies take steps
(tariffs, WTO disputes) which slow existing trade
and further undermine talks on increased global
integration.
• Multiple significant emerging economies
advance policies that harm foreign direct
investment and slow the engine of global
growth.
• Worsening conflict in the Occupied Territories
claims thousands of lives over a 10-year period,
and exacerbates geopolitical tensions and
economic decline throughout the region.
• All forms of violence in Iraq – sectarian,
insurgent, terrorist – worsen and claim
thousands of lives. Failure to achieve peace
destabilizes the region on an ongoing basis.

Environmental risks: The main shift in
understanding of environmental risk has been
increased awareness of the potential
consequences of climate change. The geophysical
factors behind an assessment of likelihood and

severity of both tropical storms and earthquakes
have not changed. In 2007, the world has
experienced two “near misses” in terms of
potential economically catastrophic inland flooding
in northern Europe and eastern China.

ENVIRONMENT
• Extreme weather events linked to climate
change will impact businesses and society at
large (e.g. multiple tropical cyclones make
landfall along the Gulf Coast, India, Bangladesh
or China over a 10-year period).
• More frequent and severe heatwaves and
droughts have harsh impact on agricultural
yields around the world.
• Declining quality and quantity of water in several
major watersheds leads to water shortages and
increased prevalence of water-borne disease.
• Natural catastrophe: Category 5 tropical
cyclone hurricane hits an economic centre such
as Tokyo or southern Florida.

• Natural catastrophe: A strong earthquake hits
an economic centre such as Tokyo, Los
Angeles or San Francisco.
• Natural catastrophe: A strong earthquake or
seaquake (followed by a strong tsunami) hits a
developing country such as China, India or
Indonesia.
• Natural catastrophe: Extreme inland flooding of
the Mississippi, Yangtze, Thames or Rhine
rivers causes direct economic and human
losses and serious disruption downstream.

21

Societal risks: Increasing “globalization of risk”
(see pages 27-29) may mean that the distinction
between infectious diseases in the developing

world and chronic diseases in the developed world
may be less operable, while the recognition of
economic costs of both is rising.

SOCIETY
• A pandemic disease jumps from the animal
population to humans, with high mortality and
transmission rates.
• Incidence of infectious disease continues to rise
in Africa and rises dramatically in Russia and
South-East Asia (TB and HIV/AIDS).

• Chronic diseases are widespread in the
developed world.
• US liability costs increase at four times the rate
of GDP growth, and spread rapidly to Europe
and Asia. Capacity for global insurance is
reduced, undermining investment and growth.

Technological risks: Increasing human exposure
to nanotechnology will increase severity should an
event occur, but this has to be balanced against
the multiple opportunities created by
nanotechnology. The constant interplay of risks
within the critical information infrastructure
(complexity of systems, number of vulnerabilities,
failure to effectively patch security holes, use of

common – versus custom – applications) makes
predicting specific attacks difficult, but there is
increasing risk of attacks in general due to lack of
resources devoted to cyber-security and constant
probing of systems. In 2007, a growing number of
electronic espionage attacks was considered to
have been driven by foreign state authorities.

TECHNOLOGY
• Attack or system failure in critical information
infrastructure (CII) creates a domino effect,
shutting down IT-dependent applications in
power, water, transport, banking and finance,
and emergency management.

22

• Studies reveal health impairment due to
exposure to widely used nanoparticles (paint,
cosmetics, healthcare). Primary impact on
public health and secondary impact on
investment in a range of nanotechnologies.

250 billion - 1 trillion more than 1 trillion
50-250 billion
10-50 billion

Severity (in US$)

The 26 Core Global Risks: Likelihood with Severity by Economic Loss

Retrenchment from
globalization (developed)

Asset price collapse

Slowing Chinese economy (6%)
Oil and gas price spike
Pandemic
Infectious disease,
Transnational crime CII breakdown
developing world
and corruption
Chronic disease, developed world
Middle East instability
Heatwaves
& droughts
Liability
regimes
Major fall in US$
Interstate & civil wars
Retrenchment from globalization (emerging)
Food insecurity
Fiscal crises in
advanced economies
Extreme climate change related weather
Emergence of
NatCat:
Failed & failing states
nanotechnology risks
Extreme
inland
International terrorism
flooding
Loss of freshwater

NatCat:
NatCat:

Cyclone
Earthquake

2-10 billion

Collapse of NPT

below 1%

1-5%

5-10%

10-20%

above 20%

Likelihood

Note: Some risks were disaggregated for the purpose of assessment in Appendix 2 to the current report. For ease of visual representation they have
been shown aggregated on the current graphics.

23

200,000-1,000,000 more than 1,000,000

Infectious disease, developing world
Food insecurity
Pandemic

NatCat:

Interstate & civil wars

Earthquake

Chronic disease, developed world

40,000-200,000

Failed & failing states
NatCat:

8,000-40,000

NatCat: Extreme
inland flooding

Cyclone
Middle East instability

Extreme climate change
Loss of
related weather
freshwater
International terrorism
Heatwaves & droughts
Collapse of NPT
CII breakdown
Emergence of
nanotechnology risks
Transnational crime
and corruption

1,600-8,000

Severity (in no. of deaths)

The 18 Core Global Risks: Likelihood with Severity by Number of Deaths

below 1%

1-5%

5-10%

10-20%

above 20%

Likelihood

Note: Some risks were disaggregated for the purpose of assessment in Appendix 2 to the current report. For ease of visual representation they have
been shown aggregated on the current graphics.

24

3. Networked World, Networked Risks

None of the global risks identified and assessed in
this report manifest in isolation. Many are
interconnected, not necessarily in a direct causative
relationship, but often indirectly, either through
common impacts or mitigation trade-offs. At each
stage of the process of managing global risks, from
identification and assessment to mitigation, an
understanding of interconnectedness enhances the
approach taken.
1. Risk identification – identifying indirect
exposures and potential tight couplings to
exogenous risk events (shocks)
2. Risk assessment – accommodating the reality of
risk conflation whereby risks are rapidly
transmitted across geographical, industry and
company boundaries
3. Risk mitigation – moving from managing risk in
isolation (ring fencing) to addressing the
transmission channels of risk (which may require
collaborative action) as well as considering
second and third order effects
Understanding the interconnected nature of global
risks is methodologically and conceptually complex.
Yet, if an understanding of interconnectedness is to
be integrated into prioritization and decision-making
at the level of government, business and
international organizations, representing complexity
is crucial. Bringing together expert views on how to
think about interconnectedness is an ongoing
mission of the Global Risk Network to exchange
ideas and methodologies.
One approach, pursued for the Global Risks 2007
report and continued in this report, was to build a
picture of correlation of core global risks through an
ongoing survey of independent experts. In 2007, this
resulted in a matrix of correlation between the core
global risks.
The approach has both strengths and limitations.
First, the matrix measures strength of correlation,
rather than pathways of causation. Correlation can
tell us that risks manifest together, but it does not
tell us how and why. As a result, correlation may
provide as much “noise” as “signal”. Second, the
matrix provides a useful measure of “static”
interconnectedness, providing an overview of
potential linkages between risks, but not an

“Interdependence is the defining issue
of the 21st century.”
Tony Blair, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom
(1997-2007); Member of the Foundation Board of the
World Economic Forum (January 2007)

understanding of their dynamic interactions over
time. Third, the correlation approach only considers
positive correlations, excluding negative correlations
(such as the potentially negative correlation between
risks related to climate change and the risk of
sustained high oil prices) which may also inform the
appropriateness of mitigation policies.
For the 2008 report, the Global Risk Network
considered the application of social network analysis
to understand correlation between global risks,
constructing a network diagram with nodes denoting
individual global risks and ties showing the strength
of correlation between the risks. Rather than treating
risks as discrete units of analysis, the focus is on
how the structure and ties affect risk transmission.
There are three dimensions of risk rendered by the
map: the size of the nodes denotes the severity of

25

the risk; the thickness of connecting lines reflects
the strength of correlation; and the spatial proximity
of the nodes is based upon similarity in risk
correlations. The last dimension ensures that risks
with similar bivariate correlations are clustered close
together, reducing the ratio between “noise” and
“signal” compared to the correlation matrix
produced for Global Risks 2007.

The correlation map highlights the different ways in
which risks can be interconnected, adding to the
understanding of assessment and potentially
providing input into stress test simulations and
scenario processes. The correlation map may also
provide a proxy for understanding some of the
mechanisms of risk transmission. A secondary
analysis of “pivotal nodes” was conducted, based
on Monte Carlo simulation techniques, which
identified the risks that are most critical to the
diffusion of global risk through the system. On the

Social Networking Diagram of Global Risks

Note: The sizes of the nodes in the social networking diagram indicate the assessment of the risk itself. The thickness of lines represent strength of
correlation, while proximity of the nodes represents similarity of correlations
Source: Witold Henisz, Associate Professor of Management, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, USA, based on expert assessments of
correlation (October 2007).

26

basis of the responses to the current survey, the top
four risks are food (in)security, an abrupt fall in the
US dollar, international terrorism and a US/Iran
conflict.

to identify potential coalitions of actors around global
risk issues and how a forum of country risk officers
could provide a mechanism for coordinating the
mitigation of global risks.

In 2008-2009 the Global Risk Network will work to
expand an understanding of correlation and
causation by bringing together experts on these
issues from public and private sectors.

Risk squeezing

The globalization of risk
Interdependency implies that we are all vulnerable to
disruptions in the global flow of people, capital and
technology. But there are at least two additional
elements to the globalization of risk which may
broaden our understanding of the mechanics of
interconnectedness in the global risk environment.
The first is risk “squeezing”: the transfer of negative
externalities of a production process, such as
environmental and human costs, from one area to
another. In recent years, this has happened on a
massive scale as a result of economic globalization,
raising a number of dilemmas for effective and
equitable global governance of risk. The first is that
shifting production to less regulated geographies
may, in itself, increase the aggregate negative
externalities associated with that production. The
second is that the transfer of risk may, in any case,
be an illusion if the negative externalities affect the
global system as a whole, or if other costs may be
re-imported in other forms. The globalization of
capital has so outpaced the globalization of
governance that returns to capital have been
decoupled from environmental and other costs.
The second is risk “homogeneity”. For example,
chronic diseases, such as heart disease, cancer and
diabetes, traditionally considered to be problems of
the developed world, are becoming common in
developing countries. As lifestyles become
increasingly convergent globally, the trend towards
similar risk profiles is likely to continue. Another
example is global pandemics. One consequence of
this growing risk homogeneity is that the case for
common and coordinated global mitigation action
has strengthened. In section 5 of the current report,
we look at how a region-at-risk model may be used

High labour and social costs, and tougher
environmental legislation in the developed world,
coupled with historic reductions in barriers to
international trade, have moved economic
production from a national to a global basis. Supply
chains have become more complex – see section 1
– and the full exploitation of differences in
comparative advantage has unlocked global
economic growth.
One result has been a delocalization of risk. Even as
primary risks in production are reduced in one
location, those risks may be “squeezed” to new
centres of production where costs, standards and
conditions are lower. Some of the effects of risk
squeezing may remain in geographies of production,
posing an ethical dilemma at the heart of
globalization.
But other effects of risk squeezing may have wider
global consequences.
First, and most clearly, risk squeezing simply
displaces the original source of risk, but without
mitigating the systemic consequences of risk and,
occasionally, worsening both the underlying risk and
aggregate systemic vulnerabilities to it. One clear
example of this is in environmental matters:
improving environmental regulation may reduce
environmental costs in the near term, but if
regulation pushes production to a less-regulated
geography which is less equipped to deal with its
consequences, then the aggregate long-term
impacts may be worse.
For example, developed country measures to reduce
carbon emissions will not be meaningful in the
absence of global frameworks and action. Yet the
lack of a global price for carbon means that
economic incentives to enhance carbon efficiency or
produce in more carbon-efficient geographies are
not there.

27

But the principle of risk squeezing in the
environmental context also applies to air and water
pollution. While air and water quality have improved
drastically in recent decades in developed countries,
quality elsewhere has been declining – calling into
question the long-term, risk-adjusted sustainability of
economic growth. Moreover, some of these problems
are easily exported. A toxic spill in a river from a
factory in China could pollute agriculture through
irrigation, enter into the production of goods for
global export, and even threaten the water supply of
a major Russian city. Environmental degradation may
ultimately lead to political unrest, both locally and
across borders. Such a problem requires, at a
minimum, a bilateral agreement and frequently global
standards of production or pollution control.
Second, as semi-finished or finished products are
exported, the effects of “risk squeezing” may be felt
in less obvious and less controllable ways, with
major consequences in importing countries. In 2007,
the discovery of toxic chemicals in children’s toys,
made in China for an American brand name, made
consumers aware of health risks in imported

products which they had previously not considered.
The companies involved suffered both a reputational
hit and major economic losses.
Third, the perception of lack of transparency in
production processes and supply chains may
undermine popular support for globalization. The
argument for consumer protection can lead to
outright economic protectionism, going far beyond
the genuine risks and beyond the original product or
geographic source of risk.

Risk homogeneity
While specific vulnerabilities will remain,
interconnectedness, globalization and the spread of
similar economic and social structures may generate
a degree of homogeneity of risk at the global level.
One example of this is in health risks. Just as
globalization has increased the commonality of
habits and lifestyles, so has it raised the
homogeneity of the risks associated with those
lifestyles. Non-communicable diseases, such as

Projected Deaths by Major Cause and Income Group, All Ages, 2005
14 000

Total deaths (000)

12 000

10 000

8 000

6 000

4 000

2 000

0

Low income
countries

Lower middle
income countries

Upper middle
income countries

High income
countries

Communicable diseases, maternal and perinatal conditions, and nutritional deficiencies
Chronic diseases*
Injuries
Note: *Chronic diseases include cardiovascular diseases, cancers, chronic respiratory disorders, diabetes, neuropsychiatric and sense organ
disorders, musculoskeletal and oral disorders, digestive diseases, genito-urinary diseases, congenital abnormalities and skin diseases.
Source: © Copyright World Health Organization (WHO), 2007. All Rights Reserved.

28

cardiovascular disease, cancer and diabetes which
are traditionally associated with a Western lifestyle,
have rapidly become prevalent in the developing
world as lifestyles have moved more towards urban
and less physically active jobs. Ironically, as people
live longer, they are now suffering from these
diseases. Another negative habit is the increased
use and consumption of tobacco, alcohol and
unhealthy foods. Companies confronted with taxes
and regulations against these products in the
developed world now target new consumers in the
developing world. Finally, global travel patterns have
made the risk of a pandemic homogenous across
the world. All countries are equally vulnerable to a
pandemic that originates in one country.

The policy conclusion: global cooperation
is required
To address externalities at the golobal level and the
increased homogeneity of global risks, international
cooperation is a necessity. One potential forum for
such cooperation would be an annual meeting
between country risk officers where they could
review global risks and mitigation strategies.
Problems between individual countries could be
dealt with on a bilateral basis.

According to the World Health Organization, chronic
diseases are worst in low- and middle-income
countries where 80% of non-communicable disease
deaths occur, and are now widely considered –
against the perceptions of many developed
countries – to be the poor nation’s major health
problem, with the notable exception of African
countries, where deaths from infectious disease
remain higher.

29

4. Financial Markets, Risk Transfer and Risk Mitigation

Financial markets are increasingly seen as a major
tool of the transfer and mitigation of an increasing
variety of global risks. Insurance and reinsurance
have traditionally been the key to management and
mitigation of risk, and the principles which allow for
maintaining both economic efficiency and social
equity will be key to maintaining the healthy role of
insurance and reinsurance in the future (see box on
page 34) on insurance and risk mitigation lessons
derived from the US experience of natural
catastrophe insurance).
The growth of financial markets has opened up the
possibility of using markets to help mitigate nontraditional risks (see box on this page) the possible
use of financial markets to reduce the risks from
nuclear non-proliferation). Also, the rapid emergence
of a new market in insurance-linked securities is
helping to cover peak risks, which cannot be
currently covered adequately by traditional insurance
and reinsurance. In some cases, financial markets
are principally acting as a vehicle of risk transfer. In
other cases, accurate pricing of risk may be helping
to drive mitigation of the primary risk.
This section of the report explores some of those
developments and asks how effective they can be in
the future. The first part reviews a proposal of how
financial markets may help mitigate a non-traditional
risk: nuclear proliferation. The second describes how
the expansion of insurance-linked securities and
other financial instruments are being used to
increase risk transfer, diversify risk into capital
markets and increase the pool of capital available for
insurance. A final part examines how an in-depth
study of insurance dealing with natural catastrophes
in the US may have broader application to how we
think about the management of global risks.

Energy, security and nuclear
non-proliferation: How private
markets can help
The nuclear renaissance
Concerns over climate change and long-term
energy security have put nuclear power firmly back
on the 2007-2008 global agenda. As a noncarbon-based energy source with a muchimproved safety record since the Three Mile Island
and Chernobyl disasters, nuclear technology has a
number of attractions in an era of uncertainty.
Many of the nuclear power plants planned or
currently under construction – a total of over 300 –
are in countries that already have a functioning
nuclear industry: Europe, the US, China, India and
Russia. But a growing number of non-nuclear
technology states are exploring the nuclear power
option: Turkey, Vietnam and Egypt, among others.
The problem is that nuclear power relies on access
to enriched uranium. Some countries exploring a
national capacity for nuclear energy fear that they
could be blocked in the future by the six states
which currently produce enriched uranium on a
commercial basis: France, Germany, the
Netherlands, Russia, the United Kingdom and the
US. To avoid this, they may decide to build their
own uranium enrichment facilities. But were this to
happen, the international structures governing
nuclear technologies would be shattered, and the
risks of wider proliferation would rise dangerously.
The economic/security trade-off
Given that the same process used to enrich
uranium for fuel in power plants can also produce
weapons-grade nuclear material, the only way to
reduce the risk of proliferation of weapons-grade
material is to dissuade states from building new
enrichment facilities.

30

But, were the international community to credibly
ensure reliable supplies of uranium-based fuel for
power generation for all countries, the incentive for
any one country to build new enrichment facilities
would be removed.
Turning the risk of the spread of nuclear
technologies into an opportunity to create a
sustainable framework for the production of safe,
clean and secure electrical power should be a
major objective of global policy. The innovative use
of financial markets may offer a way to achieve it.
The innovation: “insure to assure”
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
and governments have been grappling with this
dilemma for years. Various mechanisms to assure
states’ access to enriched uranium without
political interference have been considered. But
some fear that any IAEA solution remains
susceptible to political pressure from producer
members.
A truly innovative concept has been proposed by a
joint team from the Wharton Business School and
Harvard’s Kennedy School: “insure to assure.” The
proposed solution – complementary to the efforts
of the IAEA and others – would create a
partnership between financial industries and
governments to create the world’s first international
nuclear fuel insurance fund.
The fund would operate as follows: Premiums,
collected from all member countries, would be
deposited in a mutual insurance company (MIC)
which, in turn, would use some of the money to
build a cash reserve and to purchase supply
options. Residual funds would go to a consortium
of insurers and reinsurers that would provide
layered financial protection to all participating

countries. The IAEA member governments would
serve as a financial backstop for the consortium. In
the event of a fuel disruption, the MIC would
exercise its options and work with fuel suppliers,
energy producers and transporters to arrange
timely fuel delivery or alternative electricity
purchases off the energy grid (if available). The
insurance consortium would compensate member
countries and others involved in replacing fuel for
any loss of efficiency as previously contractually
agreed.
The concept is based on a key principle of
mitigating global risks: while everyone is looking to
ensure energy security through energy
independence, the “insure to assure” concept
might help improve energy security by creating a
clear framework for “energy interdependence.”
There are a number of classic global risk questions
on the financial market response to nuclear
proliferation – among them issues on moral hazard
and joint liability – and certainly this concept could
not be expected to be effective in the absence of a
concerted policy in other areas and trust in the
integrity of the system. However, the power of
financial markets, as a complement to other
measures, is often under-appreciated.
Implementation: nuclear and beyond
The proposal, which is now being studied by
different stakeholders, would bring together two
worlds that rarely talk to one another: the worlds of
international security and international finance. As
it stands, the proposal only deals with nuclear fuel
supplies, but there is no reason why a larger
mutual insurance company could not help turn
wider global energy interdependence from a
source of perceived vulnerability to a source of
systemic coherence and security.

31

Insurance-linked securities: how much can
financial markets diversify risk?

The market in insurance-linked securities initially
developed in response to insurers’ capital
requirements in covering four traditional “peak” risks:
windstorms in Europe, earthquakes in Japan,
hurricanes in the US and earthquakes in California.
After Hurricane Andrew in 1992 the price of
catastrophe risk coverage rose considerably and
coverage became increasingly scarce. Insurancelinked securities covering catastrophe – so-called
“cat” bonds – provided additional capital to the
insurance industry, helping it to manage catastrophe
risk and prepare for the next major event. Presently,
catastrophe bonds are issued to cover a range of
non-peak risks, from Mexican earthquakes to floods
in the United Kingdom.

The process of pooling risks and dividing that pool
into portions sold to a wide range of investors on the
secondary market – known as securitization – has
expanded massively in recent years. Securitizations
now account for one-third of the US fixed income
market. Transactions that were once considered
highly innovative are now mainstream.
More recently securitization has spread to insurance,
as insurers have transferred their risks to capital
markets through securities’ issues. The result has
been a diversification of risk for insurers and an
increase in the pool of capital available to cover
insurance risks. The use of financial markets to raise
insurance capital is not without potential drawbacks:
systemic risk could eventually be created by
insurance-linked securities. However, these potential
constraints on securitization are far into the future.
Currently, the relatively small size of the insurancelinked securities market and a growing understanding
and sophistication of insurance-linked securities
suggest considerable scope for financial market
diversification of an increasingly broad set of risks.

Subsequent transactions have further broadened
insurance-linked securities. In January 2006, Swiss
Re securitized US$ 252 million of credit risk linked to
claims and reserves on its credit reinsurance
business for underwriting years 2006 through 2008.
Catastrophe securitizations – or mortality bonds –
can also be used by insurers and reinsurers to
hedge against the risk of increased death rates
caused by a major global risk (such as a pandemic
or a major terrorist attack). In all of these cases,

Typical Cat Bond Structure

1 The Sponsor enters into
a financial contract with
a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV)

Investments

3

Investment
earnings

1

2

Premium

Notes

SPONSOR

SPV
Contingent
claim payment
Investment
earnings

4

32

Investors
Cash
proceeds

Scheduled
interest

Swap
Counterparty

Source: Swiss Re

2 The SPV hedges the financial
contract by issuing Notes to
investors in capital markets

Principal
& interest

Financial guarantee

5

Note
Guarantor

3 Proceeds from the securities
offering are invested in high
quality securities and held in
a collateral trust
4 Investment returns are
swapped to a LIBOR-based
rate by the Swap Counterparty
5 In some transactions, principal
and interest on the Notes may
be guaranteed by a Note
Guarantor

Other insurance-linked financial
instruments

securitization improves the diversification of risk and,
therefore, the risk-bearing capacity of the insurance
system. As securitization grows more cost effective,
insurers will be able to increasingly share cost benefits,
contributing further to the risk transfer market.

Besides insurance-linked securities, a wide variety of
derivatives and other financial instruments are now
being used to transfer insurance risks. The market for
weather derivatives is large, growing rapidly and fairly
well known. Most of these derivatives pay out when
the weather is exceptionally warm, or exceptionally
cold. They are also promoted in emerging markets
to reduce agricultural income volatility. In addition,
the market for over-the-counter industry loss
warranties is growing. These instruments provide
protection against US hurricanes and are triggered

Insurance-linked securities have grown considerably
in recent years in terms of depth, breadth and
overall market capacity (see figure below). For
investors, insurance-linked securities are attractive
as they provide an investment in a specific insurance
risk with potentially low correlations with equity and
credit markets, and with a reduced counterparty risk
because some funds can be held in trust.

Significant Increase in Market Depth and Breadth
# investors outside of (re)insurance

# of sponsors securitized
41

150
24
50
11
20

3%
8
5%
14
15%
32

# of risks securitized

max annual expected loss

Note: The increasing threshold of annual expected loss, the range of different risks being securitized and the number of sponsors involved in
securitization of insurance-linked securities indicate the growing maturity of insurance-linked securities, and the market appetite for them
Source: Swiss Re

Total ILS outstanding, by year

Total non-life bonds outstanding, by year

billions US$

35

15000

30
12000
25
9000

20
15

6000

10
3000
0

5
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

0

1997

1998

Issued
Issued

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Outstanding

Outstanding

Note: New issuance in 2007 (to November) had already exceeded that of 2006. Total non-life bonds outstanding totalled approximately US$ 14
billion. Fourth quarter 2007 also saw over US$ 600 million of extreme mortality cover placed. Total bonds outstanding exceeded US$ 34 billion
Source: Swiss Re

33

when insurance industry losses for a particular
hurricane are high. Also in the US, the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange and the New York Mercantile
Exchange are attempting to establish exchangetraded derivatives that provide protection against
hurricane losses. Finally, there are a wide variety of
customized derivatives, providing protection against
losses from earthquakes and typhoons in Japan,
earthquakes in Turkey, excess mortality losses, aviation
peril, etc. All of these instruments are arranged by
(re)insurers, brokers and banks for companies and
insurers, with protection provided by capital markets –
often hedge funds that specialize in insurance risks.

Applying the “5i” framework to financial
risk transfer instruments
Applying the “5i” framework of risk mitigation to
insurance-linked securities yields an analysis of the
strengths, weaknesses and requirements of
insurance-linked securities in global risk mitigation.
• Insight: Broader and deeper markets should
motivate a more sophisticated understanding of
the drivers and impacts of risks – for example,
the inclusion of capital market investors in a
pandemic risk transfer might heighten awareness
of the correlation between extreme mortality risks
and economic risks.
• Information flow: Broadening of markets should
improve the quality and flow of information about
risks – and should encourage transparency in the
reinsurance industry.
• Incentives: Accurate pricing of risk transfer
instruments should, in principle, act as an
incentive for ex-ante mitigation measures and
even, where appropriate, risk avoidance.
• Investment: Using financial markets increases
the pool of investment available to indemnify the
consequences of global risks.
• Institutions: Financial markets require strong
public institutions to allow the market to flourish.
These institutions and financial markets are in a
symbiotic relationship. Efficient financial regulation
and a secure legal environment for insurancelinked securities is a prerequisite to their expanded
use, and to help improve global risk mitigation.
Should transaction costs prove too high, the range
and scope of the market will be constrained.

34

Insurance and risk transfer:
lessons from natural catastrophe
insurance in the US
Natural catastrophes have had a greater nominal US
dollar impact on insurers over the past 15 years than
in the entire history of insurance. Hurricane Katrina
alone cost insurers and reinsurers an estimated
US$ 45 billion, while losses paid by private insurers
due to major natural catastrophes in 2005 totalled
US$ 83 billion.
A significant part of the increase in natural
catastrophe damage is due to increased
construction in hazard-prone areas in recent
decades, but there may be a longer-term driver as
well: global warming may be resulting in increasing
frequency of severe storms in certain parts of the
world. While new construction in hazard-prone
areas could be easily reduced by government
regulation, the inertia effect of historical carbon
emissions means that global warming will continue
for decades, even if the future rate of warming
may eventually be slowed and reversed by
concerted international action.
Yet, insurance can help manage the impact of this
risk in two important ways: directly, by providing
financial protection to businesses and individuals
against losses from catastrophic events and
indirectly, by encouraging risk mitigation measures
through lower premiums for those who invest in
risk-reducing measures. In principle, insurance, by
basing its prices on the risk of losses, can provide
a strong incentive for improved risk management.
In addition to serving an important social function,
insurance can create the conditions for efficient
economic allocation of resources. Often, however,
the politics and economics of insurance clash.
Insurance will only be provided if premiums reflect
actuarial risk: the insured damage resulting from a
specific event, weighted by the probability of that

event occurring. Natural disasters cannot be
prevented, though reducing climate change in the
future could limit the increases in intensity and
frequency of some natural catastrophes. Actuarial
risk to individual properties can be reduced by
fortifying them, and aggregate risk can be lowered
by decreasing construction in vulnerable zones.
Developing guiding principles
Two guiding principles for using insurance and
other financial instruments to effectively mitigate
risk have been developed by the Wharton Risk
Management and Decision Processes Center in
the context of a research project on “Managing
Large-Scale Risks in a New Era of Catastrophes”.
• Principle 1 – Premiums Reflecting Risk:
Insurance premiums should be based on risk,
to provide signals to individuals as to the
hazards they face and to encourage them to
engage in cost-effective mitigation measures to
reduce their vulnerability to catastrophes.
• Principle 2 – Dealing with Equity and
Affordability Issues: Any special treatment given
to residents currently residing in hazard-prone
areas (e.g. low-income homeowners) should
come from general public funding and not
through insurance premium subsidies.
Mitigation
Economic analysis of case studies in four hurricanevulnerable US states revealed that a range of
physical mitigation measures – such as storm
shutters, roof anchors and safety film on windows
– could reduce insured losses from a severe
hurricane considerably (by up to 61% in Florida).
But property owners rarely make these voluntary
investments because they believe that
catastrophes will not happen to them, and

because the economic incentives to invest are
suppressed by artificially low premiums.
In a survey of those living along the US Atlantic
and Gulf Coasts, undertaken in the spring of 2006,
83% of respondents had taken no steps to fortify
their homes with relatively inexpensive measures,
even after the devastating 2004 and 2005
hurricane seasons.
Lessons for global risk management?
What lessons can be drawn from US natural
catastrophe insurance to understand the role of
insurance in managing global risks?
• First, understanding the nature of the risk and
quantifying it is the prerequisite for insurance.
• Second, there is a need for new risk transfer
instruments such as catastrophe bonds and
other financial instruments, which can
supplement traditional reinsurance, to enable
insurers to protect themselves against
catastrophic losses and reduce the need for
government intervention.
• Third, insurers need to be able to charge a
premium that reflects the risk they assume and
which rewards those who undertake mitigation
measures. Government intervention to artificially
suppress premiums may have unintended
consequences, including reducing the
economic sustainability of insurance by skewing
incentives. However, government codification of
mitigation measures may help.
• Finally, the way in which equity concerns are
met is vital. It would be more efficient to provide
insurance vouchers and mitigation grants to
low-income groups in the US living in natural
catastrophe zones, than to mandate artificially
low insurance premiums. Similarly, addressing
equity issues at a level should not be done in a
way which reduces the ability to leverage
financial markets to mitigate risk.

35

5. Structuring Mitigation at the State and International
Level: Taking the Country Risk Officer Forward

In Global Risks 2007, the Global Risk Network
introduced the concept of the country risk officer as
a public sector equivalent to corporate risk officers in
the private sector, who are growing in importance.
Given the complexity and correlations of risk, possible
trade-offs across government department silos, and
the agreed need for better communication between
the public and private sector, managing risk on a
portfolio basis is as important in government as it is
in the private sector. More importantly, identifying a
common language of risk and risk assessment across
the public and private sectors may make it easier in
the future for both to cooperate in mitigation initiatives.
For Global Risks 2008, the Global Risk Network
convened an informal group of experts to explore
the country risk officer concept, to understand its
limits and its strengths and to begin to understand
what principles of best practice could be developed
to guide country risk management.
It was concluded that the country risk officer was
not necessarily a single role to be held by one
individual – it might be a committee, a process, or
multiple coordinated positions. Much would depend
on the specific political and economic structures in
which the concept of country portfolio risk
management is applied – a centralized system such
as the United Kingdom or a federal system such as
Germany or Switzerland would necessitate very
different structures to achieve a similar objective.
It was also agreed that, while an individual country
risk officer in one country might vastly improve
understanding and coordination of risk on the
national level, many global risks require an inherently
international response. A forum of national country
risk officers might be one way of achieving common
assessment, trust and institutional confidence to
enable much improved management of global risks
when they manifest across international borders.
Currently, government bodies play a four-part role in
risk management at the national level.
• Action: from identification of risks to crisis
management and risk communication
• Regulation: the use of legislation to help prevent
the emergence of risks and to protect against the
consequences of risks should they arise

36

• Economic continuity: the use of measures
(such as release of financial reserves or strategic
energy reserves) which ensure economic
robustness in the face of a wide range of risk
events
• Insurance: acting as an insurer of last resort

Global risk, government and business:
different incentives, different goals,
common opportunities
The incentives for business and government in
risk mitigation are different:
• Doing business involves taking risk;
government largely avoids risk.
• While businesses aim to maximize profit and
shareholder value, both relatively easily
measured metrics, governments seek to
satisfy a much broader set of stakeholders,
with far more complex trade-offs.
• Government assessments of global risk are
necessarily idiosyncratic in that they consider
stakeholder concerns differentially – but they
must obtain broad legitimacy to be
considered as a basis for action.
However, opportunities exist for collaboration
between government and business on
developing and sharing common methodologies.

The group established five principles of country risk
management which could be applied across the
spectrum of governments to guide country risk
officers, whether the officer is an individual, a
coordinating committee or takes some other
institutional form.
• Accountability: The need for accountability of
risk assessment is seen as a fundamental
condition of the legitimacy of assessment as a
basis for concerted government action both
vertically (within departments of government) and
horizontally (across branches of government).
Clarity of accountability would increase the
incentives for effective mitigation measures.
• Integrated assessment: Establishing common
procedures across government departments to
assess risks, cross-disciplinary scenarios and the

language of risk would provide a basis not only
for better crisis management but also for defining
more effective prevention and mitigation of global
risks. Too often positive externalities are overlooked
and negative externalities are exaggerated by lack
of an integrated assessment of risk.
• Devolved implementation: Integrated
assessment should not imply centralized
implementation. Devolved implementation of risk
mitigation strategies should allow flexible and
adaptive responses to common risks.
• Separation of analysis and policy: The case
for devolved implementation is strengthened by
the argument in favour of separation of analysis
and policy. Analysis is better kept within a
separate structure, so as to prevent bureaucratic
pressures impinging upon independence of
analysis.

Region at risk: A basis for identifying
international risk mitigation coalitions?
An additional institutional innovation suggested in
Global Risks 2007 was the creation of an “avantgarde of relevant governments and companies
around different global risks.” The report argued
that the urgency, complexity and multiple tradeoffs in global risks require structures which can
respond flexibly, assemble quickly and achieve
legitimacy through success. “A process of
gradually expanding alliances rather than a
proposition requiring permanent consensus” may
offer a better way forward.
But, even under conditions of extreme
interdependency, the problem of mobilizing
collective action to mitigate global risks remains.
One strategy to activate coalitions to mitigate
global risks may lie in an improved understanding
of national risk exposures and identifying clusters
of countries that are exposed to the same risks in
similar orders of magnitude.

• Disclosure and transparency (if possible):
Governments are constantly caught between
pressure to disclose risk assessments and the
need to keep some assessments confidential so
as to avoid panic, protect sources and maintain
resilience. But even the maintenance of
confidential information can create the conditions
for incomplete or inaccurate information leading
to an “infodemic” situation in a crisis, where the
consequences of popular reaction to a perceived
risk far outweigh the risk itself. The development
of much more granular risk communication
strategies will ensure a culture of maximum
disclosure and transparency, while safeguarding
against information overload.

The region at risk model, which will be developed
in 2008-2009, will achieve this by drilling down
into the frequencies and severities of global risk at
the national level, gathering expert input on
country risk exposures, and creating a framework
which is compatible with the global approach
taken in previous Global Risk reports.
Individual countries can then be represented by a
specific set of risks, and an aggregate risk
measure can be derived that allows for crosscountry comparisons. Cross-correlations, which
account for different causal relationships among
the various global risks, complete the country
model. The more interesting features will derive
from the model’s capability to integrate a wealth of
data, account for cross-correlations among risks,
analyse specific vulnerabilities, identify country
clusters, engage in what if scenarios and,
ultimately, point to potential coalitions of countries
to mitigate risk.

37

The country risk officer: an example
from the United Kingdom
As discussed above, the country risk officer is not
necessarily a single individual. It may equally be a
cross-government process, a secretariat, a
function within different ministries, or a
combination of all three. The common principles
for effective country risk management identified
above may take a variety of institutional forms.
One of the pioneers in coordinated risk
management is the United Kingdom, which set up
the Civil Contingencies Secretariat (CCS) in 2001
initially to improve the effectiveness of post-crisis
management, but increasingly to play a more
forward-looking role in identifying and assessing
potential risks to national resilience. The CCS
provides a single framework for government
actions to absorb, respond to and recover from
disruptive challenges, but serves a number of
different functions: establishing the risk landscape
facing the United Kingdom, improving consistency
across government in terms of assessment and
management of risks, clarifying roles and
responsibilities and providing a basis for effective
performance management.
One of the key problems within government in
terms of risk management in general has been the
existence of either horizontal disconnects between
levels of government, or vertical disconnects
between departments of government. In some
countries the response to interconnectedness of
global risks has been to merge existing
government departments with existing operational
responsibilities, with varying degrees of operational
success. The CCS, in contrast, is a relatively new
and relatively small entity at the centre of the
United Kingdom government (the Cabinet Office)
designed to act as a focal point within government
for identification, assessment and management of
risk, and as an entry point for dialogue with the
private and voluntary sectors, as well as with the
public sector at local, regional and national level.

38

The keystone of national risk management in the
United Kingdom has become the annual national
assessment process on an all-hazards basis to
identify, describe and quantify risks which may
impact the resilience of the country, looking
forward over a five-year period. Identification,
analysis and prioritization of risks are placed ahead
of measuring capability gaps, so as to avoid a
retroactive fitting of risk identification on existing
government structures. The widest possible range
of government agencies is involved in identification
and description of the national risk landscape, so
as to ensure a comprehensive list of risks and
enhance a common understanding of global risks
facing the country.
At the assessment stage, the same method is
used to measure the severity of all risks while two
approaches can be taken to quantify the likelihood
depending on whether the risk is considered a
natural hazard and, therefore, more amenable to
objective measurement on a historical or scientific
basis, or a threat of malicious harm for which
objective assessments have to be blended with
more subjective judgement. In both cases,
however, the end result is an estimation of the
likelihood and severity of plausible worst-case
scenarios which allow for comparison and
prioritization across risk categories. The highest
rated risks are then considered in terms of their
generic and specific consequences and whether,
at the local, regional or national level, government
plans, infrastructure, equipment, legislation, supplies,
doctrine and training are adequate to manage and
mitigate them. The CCS coordinates capability
enhancements where this is not the case.
This approach is thought to be effective in prioritizing
and quantifying the risks to homeland security –
broadly defined – needing to be dealt with. It is too
early to conclude the effectiveness of the CCS
approach in improving the United Kingdom’s ability
to manage global risks. But one obvious constraint
is the lack of obvious interlocutors in other
countries, despite the transnational and
interconnected nature of many of the risks which
the CCS identifies and assesses.

6. Conclusion

This year it will be difficult to manage global risks.
Both political and economic uncertainties are likely
to act as a focus for global discussion and energy.
On the economic side, an exceptional period of
global growth may come under pressure as the
liquidity crisis of 2007 impacts the real economy. On
the political side, changes of government in several
major countries and an uncertain situation in the
Middle East will dominate. Leadership on global risk
issues will be an increasingly precious commodity.
As this report has indicated, some progress on
understanding and managing global risks is taking
place. Opportunities for a peaceful settlement in the
Israel-Palestine conflict may be stronger in 2008
than at any time since the turn of the century. Major
emerging economies have increasingly
demonstrated their willingness to take a leadership
role in managing global risks. New financial products
may be increasing the potential of financial markets
to diversify and absorb risk. Risk management has
become a key element of the management and
strategy of both business and government.
Recognition of the need to reform the global energy
economy has set the stage for a multi-decade shift
in direction.

But, for many of the global risks discussed in this
report, the question of ownership of these risks
remains unanswered. The fragmentation of
ownership of global risks and the complexity of
interdependencies will make equitable and
sustainable management of global risks hugely
challenging. Should systemic financial risk lead to a
serious deterioration in the world economy, the
prospects for collaborative mitigation may be
reversed on several fronts simultaneously as
attention turns to more immediate concerns.
The Global Risk Network will continue to bring
together policy-makers, business leaders and nongovernmental organizations to help align
assessments of risk, to understand institutional gaps
and to better grasp the interconnectedness of
sectors and risks.

39

Appendix 1: Taxonomy of Global Risk:
Trends, Issues of Concern, Risks

In 2007-2008 the Global Risk Network identified
trends, issues of concern and risks. Trends are
observable facts in the contemporary world. Issues
of concern are potential challenges which arise from
those trends. The risks identified are specific
realizations of those challenges in a format which is
sufficiently specific to be open to a level of
assessment in terms of relative severity and
likelihood, without being so specific as to preclude
them as a basis for decision-making.

The probability of a specific scenario occurring
reduces as the parameters of the scenario become
more described. But scenarios with negligible
probability are unlikely to be a firm basis for
decision-making. A balance is therefore required
between specificity and generality.
In some domains the path between trends, issues
and risks is clear. In others, notably geopolitical risk,
the pathway from trend to risk is less clear,
contingency is greater and common issues can
manifest in many different ways.

1. Economics – 6 trends, 6 issues of concern, 6 risks
1.1. Trend: Growing imbalances in food/agricultural production and use, driven in part by biofuel production
and a shift to water-intensive crops
1.1.1. Issue of concern: Rapidly rising and increasingly volatile food prices
1.1.1.1. Risk: Rising and volatile prices create significant shortages for poor consumers globally
(those whose consumption basket is more than 50% food)
1.2. Trend: Tightening energy markets
1.2.1. Issue of concern: Vulnerability to supply-side disruption
1.2.1.1. Risk: Oil or gas prices rise steeply due to a major supply disruption (decreased global
supply by 10% for several months)
1.3. Trend: Macroeconomic Imbalances
1.3.1. Issue of concern: Unsustainability of US current account deficit
1.3.1.1. Risk: An abrupt, major fall in the value of the US dollar with impacts throughout the
financial system
1.4. Trend: Rise of Chinese Economic Power
1.4.1. Issue of concern: Sustainability of Chinese economic growth
1.4.1.1. Risk: Domestic social/political issues combine to reduce Chinese growth to 6% or less
(sustained slower growth)
1.5. Trend: Ageing populations in developed economies
1.5.1. Issue of concern: Potential for fiscal crises
1.5.1.1. Risk: Declining fiscal positions force multiple governments of wealthy countries to raise
taxes, leading to economic stagnation
1.6. Trend: High and increasing asset prices fuelled by unprecedented liquidity
1.6.1. Issue of concern: Asset ‘bubble’ and credit crunch
1.6.1.1. Risk: House and other asset prices collapse in the US, United Kingdom and Europe,
significantly reducing consumer spending and creating a recession

41

2. Geopolitics – 7 trends, 9 issues of concern, 12 risks
2.1. Trend: Rise of non-traditional/asymmetric warfare
2.1.1. Issue of concern: International terrorism
2.1.1.1. Risk: International terrorists mount multiple attacks with conventional and chemical (but
not nuclear) weapons, causing significant economic and human losses and
exacerbating the retrenchment from globalization
2.2. Trend: Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction
2.2.1. Issue of concern: Potential spread of nuclear capabilities
2.2.1.1. Risk: Collapse of the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) leads to multiple states
simultaneously pursuing nuclear technologies and weaponization, with associated
increase in geopolitical tensions dragging on the global economy
2.3. Trend: Reconfiguration of global power
2.3.1. Issue of concern: War
2.3.1.1. Risk: US/Iran conflict
2.3.1.2. Risk: US/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea conflict
2.4. Trend: Widening gap between “geographies of order and disorder”
2.4.1. Issue of concern: Failed and failing states
2.4.1.1. Risk: US/Iran conflict Nation building in Afghanistan fails, providing haven for
international terrorist groups and triggering the decline of the Pakistani state
2.4.1.2. Risk: Disorder in the Horn of Africa worsens as multiple states descend into conflict and
offer haven for terrorist groups
2.4.1.3. Risk: A fragile Latin American regime collapses suddenly, spreading political and
economic uncertainty throughout the region
2.5. Trend: Global integration outpacing international policing capabilities
2.5.1. Issue of concern: Transnational crime
2.5.1.1. Risk: Penetration of organized crime in the global economy increases significantly over a
10-year period, weakening state authority, worsening the investment climate and
slowing growth
2.6. Trend: Retrenchment from globalization
2.6.1. Issue of concern: Rising protectionism in developed economies
2.6.1.1. Risk: Multiple developed economies adopt policies (tariffs, WTO disputes) which retard
existing trade and further undermine talks on increased global integration
2.6.2. Issue of concern: Rising economic nationalism in developing economies
2.6.2.1. Risk: Multiple significant emerging economies advance policies that harm foreign direct
investment and slow the engine of global growth
2.7. Trend: Intractability of Middle East conflicts
2.7.1. Issue of concern: Israeli/Palestinian conflict
2.7.1.1. Risk: Worsening conflict in the Occupied Territories claims thousands of lives over a 10year period, and exacerbates geopolitical tensions and economic decline throughout
the region
2.7.2. Issue of concern: War in Iraq
2.7.2.1. Risk: All forms of violence in Iraq – sectarian, insurgent, terrorist – worsen and claim
thousands of lives. Failure to achieve peace destabilizes the region on an ongoing basis.

42

3. Environment – 3 trends, 6 issues of concern, 7 risks
3.1. Trend: Climate Change/Global Warming
3.1.1. Issue of concern: Increase in extreme weather events
3.1.1.1. Risk: Extreme weather events linked to climate change will impact businesses and
society at large (e.g. multiple tropical cyclones make landfall along the Gulf Coast, India,
Bangladesh or China over a 10-year period)
3.1.2. Issue of concern:Changing rainfall patterns
3.1.2.1. Risk: More frequent and severe heatwaves and droughts have harsh impacts on
agricultural yields around the world
3.2. Trend: Ecosystem degradation
3.2.1. Issue of concern: Loss of freshwater services
3.2.1.1. Risk: Declining quality and quantity of water in several major watersheds leads to water
shortages and increased prevalence of water-borne disease
3.3. Trend: : Increasing human exposure to natural catastrophes
3.3.1. Issue of concern: Earthquakes
3.3.1.1. Risk: Natural catastrophe: A strong earthquake hits an economic centre such as Tokyo,
Los Angeles or San Francisco
3.3.1.2. Risk: Natural catastrophe: A strong earthquake or seaquake (followed by a strong
tsunami) hits a developing country such as China, India or Indonesia
3.3.2. Issue of concern: Inland flooding
3.3.2.1. Risk: Natural catastrophe: Extreme inland flooding of the Mississippi, Yangtze, Thames or
Rhine rivers causes direct economic and human losses and serious disruption downstream
3.3.3. Issue of concern: Tropical hurricanes
3.3.3.1. Risk: Natural catastrophe: Category 5 tropical hurricane hits an economic centre such
as Tokyo or southern Florida

4. Society – 4 trends, 4 issues of concern, 4 risks
4.1. Trend: Greater interconnectedness of social systems
4.1.1. Issue of concern: Potential for fast-travelling pathogens
4.1.1.1. Risk: A pandemic disease jumps from the animal population to humans, with high
mortality and transmission rates following.
4.2. Trend: Increasing prevalence of infectious disease in the developing world
4.2.1. Issue of concern: Potential for worsening of global AIDS/TB/malaria epidemics
4.2.1.1. Risk: Incidence of infectious disease continues to rise in Africa and rises dramatically in
Russia and South-East Asia (TB and HIV/AIDS)
4.3. Trend: Increasing burden of chronic disease in the developed world
4.3.1. Issue of concern: Conflation of obesity/diabetes/Cardiovascular disease
4.3.1.1. Risk: Chronic diseases are widespread in the developed world
4.4. Trend: Spread of liability regimes
4.4.1. Issue of concern: Potential spread of US-style liability regimes domestically and internationally
4.4.1.1. Risk: US liability costs increase at four times the rate of GDP growth, and spread rapidly
to Europe and Asia. Capacity for global insurance is reduced, undermining investment
and growth

43

5. Technology – 2 trends, 2 issues of concern, 2 risks
5.1. Trend: Increasingly interdependent critical information infrastructure (CII)
5.1.1. Issue of concern: Vulnerability of CII to attack or system failure
5.1.1.1. Risk: Attack or system failure in CII creates a domino effect, shutting down ITdependent applications in power, water, transport, banking and finance, and emergency
management
5.2. Trend: Development of technology on the nanoscale
5.2.1. Issue of concern: Potential toxicity of nanoparticles
5.2.1.1. Risk: Studies reveal health impairment due to exposure to widely used nanoparticles
(paint, cosmetics, healthcare). Primary impacts on public health and secondary impacts
on investment in a range of nanotechnologies

44

Appendix 2: Risk Assessments

which will alter likelihood and severity within 10
years; for others likelihood and severity may change
due to inaction or shifts in underlying causal trends
and, in all cases, new information may alter our
future perspective on likelihood and mitigation.

The risk assessments below provide the best
aggregate view of the partners involved in this report.
All assessments have resulted from group discussion,
but they contain varying degrees of certainty and
agreement as to the manifestation of the risk both in
terms of likelihood and severity. Certain risks can be
assessed for likelihood using traditional actuarial
models – particularly natural catastrophe risks. For
other risks – particularly geopolitical risks – the
ranges of possible outcomes are much wider and
correspondingly uncertainty looms large.

Most risk definitions are broadly similar from 2007 to
2008, but a number of other definitions have been
sharpened to increase granularity of measurement,
and geopolitical risks have been disaggregated for
the purposes of assessment. The 2007 and 2008
assessments are therefore broadly, but not directly,
comparable.

The assessments below are not a fixed view of how
the world will turn out over a 10-year time frame.
Many of the risks are open to mitigation measures

LIKELIHOOD

Risk Assessments – Economic Loss
1
2
3
4
5

below 1%
1-5%
5-10%
10-20%
above 20%

2-10 billion
10-50 billion
50-250 billion
250 billion-1 trillion
>1 trillion

2007

2008
LIKELIHOOD

SEVERITY (US$)

LIKELIHOOD

SEVERITY

SEVERITY

ECONOMICS

ECONOMICS
Rising and volatile prices create significant
shortages for poor people globally (those whose
consumption basket is more than 50% food)

3

3

Oil or gas prices rise steeply due to a major
supply disruption (decreased global supply of
10% for several months)

4

4

Oil price shock

4

4

An abrupt, major fall in the value of the US
dollar over time with impacts throughout the
financial system

3.5

3

US current account
deficit

3

3

Domestic social/political issues combine to
slow Chinese growth to 6% or less (sustained
over time)

3.5

4

China hard landing

4

4

2

3

Coming fiscal crises
caused by
demographic shift

2

3

4.5

5

Blow up in asset
prices/indebtedness

4

5

Declining fiscal positions force multiple
governments of wealthy countries to raise
taxes, leading to economic stagnation
House and other asset prices collapse in the
US, United Kingdom and continental Europe,
reducing consumer spending and creating a
recession

45

2007

2008
LIKELIHOOD

International terrorists mount multiple attacks
with conventional and chemical (but not
nuclear) weapons, causing significant
economic and human losses and exacerbating
the retrenchment from globalization

3

2

Collapse of NPT leads to multiple states
simultaneously pursuing nuclear technologies
and weaponization, with associated increase in
geopolitical tensions dragging on the global
economy

3.5

1.5

Interstate & civil wars
• US/Iran conflict
• US/Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea conflict

3
3
2.5

3
3
3

Failed & failing states
• Nation building in Afghanistan fails,
providing haven for international terrorist
groups and triggering the decline of the
Pakistani state
• Disorder in the Horn of Africa worsens as
multiple states descend into conflict and
offer haven for terrorist groups
• A fragile Latin American regime collapses
suddenly, spreading political and economic
uncertainty throughout the region

4
4.5

2.5
2

4

1

2

2

Penetration of organized crime in the global
economy increases significantly over a 10-year
period, weakening state authority, worsening
the investment climate and slowing growth

3

3

Multiple developed economies take steps
(tariffs, WTO disputes) which retard existing
trade and further undermine talks on increased
global integration

3

5

3.5

3

46

SEVERITY

GEOPOLITICS

GEOPOLITICS

Multiple significant emerging economies
advance policies that harm foreign direct
investment and slow the engine of global
growth

LIKELIHOOD

SEVERITY

International terrorism

4

2

3.5

2

4

2.5

Interstate and civil
wars

3.5

4

Transnational crime
and corruption

3.5

3.5

Retrenchment from
globalization

2.5

5

Proliferation of WMD

Failed and failing
states

2007

2008
LIKELIHOOD

4
3

3.5
2.5

5

2.5

4.5

3.5

3

3

3.5

2.5

3

Natural catastrophe:
Tropical Storms

2

3

2

3

2

2.5

Extreme weather events linked to climate
change will impact businesses and society at
large (e.g. multiple tropical cyclones make
landfall along the Gulf Coast, India, Bangladesh
or China over a 10-year period)

3.5

3

More frequent and severe heatwaves and
droughts have harsh impacts on agricultural
yields around the world

3.5

3

3

2

Natural catastrophe: Category 5 tropical
cyclone hits an economic centre such as Tokyo
or southern Florida

Middle East instability

ENVIRONMENT

ENVIRONMENT

Declining quality and quantity of water in
several major watersheds leads to water
shortages and increased prevalence of waterborne disease.

SEVERITY

GEOPOLITICS

GEOPOLITICS
Middle-East instability
• Worsening conflict in the Occupied
Territories claims thousands of lives over
a 10-year period, and exacerbates
geopolitical tensions and economic
decline throughout the region
• All forms of violence in Iraq – sectarian,
insurgent, terrorist – worsen and claim
thousands of lives. Failure to achieve
peace destabilizes the region on an
ongoing basis

LIKELIHOOD

SEVERITY

Climate change

Loss of freshwater

2

Natural catastrophe: A strong earthquake hits
an economic centre such as Tokyo, Los
Angeles or San Francisco

2

3

Natural catastrophe:
Earthquakes

Natural catastrophe: Extreme inland flooding of
the Mississippi, Yangtze, Thames or Rhine
rivers causes direct economic and human
losses and serious disruption downstream

2

2.5

Natural catastrophe:
Inland Flooding

47

2007

2008
LIKELIHOOD

LIKELIHOOD

SEVERITY

SEVERITY

SOCIETY

SOCIETY
3

4

Pandemics

2

4

Incidence of infectious disease continues to
rise in Africa and rises dramatically in Russia
and South-East Asia (TB and HIV/AIDS)

2.5

3

Infectious disease in
the developing world

3

2.5

Chronic diseases become widespread in the
developed world

4

3.5

Chronic disease in
developed countries

4.5

3

US liability costs increase at 4x the rate of GDP
growth, and spread rapidly to Europe and Asia.
Capacity for global insurance is reduced,
undermining investment and growth

3

3

3

3

Breakdown of critical
information
infrastructure (CII)

3

3.5

Emergence of risks
associated with
nanotechnology

2

2

A pandemic disease jumps from the animal
population to humans, with high mortality and
transmission rates following

TECHNOLOGY

TECHNOLOGY
Attack or system failure in CII creates a domino
effect, shutting down IT-dependent applications
in power, water, transport, banking and
finance, and emergency management
Studies reveal health impairment due to
exposure to widely used nanoparticles (paint,
cosmetics, healthcare). Primary impacts on
public health and secondary impacts on
investment in a range of nanotechnologies

48

Liability regimes

3.5

3.5

2

2-2.5

Risk assessments – Lives lost
1
2
3
4
5

below 1%
1-5%
5-10%
10-20%
above 20%

1 600-8 000
8 000-40 000
40 000-200 000
200 000-1million
>1million

2007

2008
LIKELIHOOD

LIKELIHOOD

SEVERITY

SEVERITY

ECONOMICS

ECONOMICS
Rising and volatile prices create significant
shortages for poor people globally (those whose
consumption basket is more than 50% food)

SEVERITY
(deaths)

LIKELIHOOD

3

5

GEOPOLITICS

GEOPOLITICS

4

1.5

Proliferation of WMD

3.5

0.5

US/China conflict

3.5

4

4

3.5

Interstate and civil
wars

3.5

4

Transnational crime
and corruption

3.5

2

International terrorists mount multiple attacks
with conventional and chemical (but not
nuclear) weapons, causing significant
economic and human losses and exacerbating
the retrenchment from globalization

3

2

International terrorism

Collapse of NPT leads to multiple states
simultaneously pursuing nuclear technologies
and weaponization, with associated increase in
geopolitical tensions dragging on the global
economy

3.5

2

Interstate & civil wars
• US/Iran conflict
• US/Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea conflict

3.5
3
2.5

4
3
3

Failed & failing states
• Nation building in Afghanistan fails,
providing haven for international terrorist
groups and triggering the decline of the
Pakistani state
• Disorder in the Horn of Africa worsens as
multiple states descend into conflict and
offer haven for terrorist groups
• A fragile Latin American regime collapses
suddenly, spreading political and economic
uncertainty throughout the region

4
4.5

3.5
2

4

2

2

1

Penetration of organized crime in the global
economy increases significantly over a 10-year
period, weakening state authority, worsening
the investment climate and slowing growth

3

1

Failed and failing
states

49

2007

2008
LIKELIHOOD

SEVERITY

SEVERITY

4.5

3

3.5

3

GEOPOLITICS

GEOPOLITICS
Middle-East instability
• Worsening conflict in the Occupied
Territories claims thousands of lives over
a 10-year period, and exacerbates
geopolitical tensions and economic
decline throughout the region
• All forms of violence in Iraq – sectarian,
insurgent, terrorist – worsen and claim
thousands of lives. Failure to achieve
peace destabilizes the region on an
ongoing basis

LIKELIHOOD

4
3

3
2

5

3.5

Middle East instability

ENVIRONMENT

ENVIRONMENT
Extreme weather events linked to climate
change will impact businesses and society at
large (e.g. multiple tropical cyclones make
landfall along the Gulf Coast, India, Bangladesh
or China over a 10-year period)

3.5

2.5

More frequent and severe heatwaves and
droughts have harsh impacts on agricultural
yields around the world

3.5

2

Declining quality and quantity of water in
several major watersheds leads to water
shortages and increased prevalence of waterborne disease

3

2.5

Natural catastrophe: Category 5 tropical
cyclone hits a densely populated area in an
emerging country such as India, China or
Bangladesh.

4

3

Natural catastrophe:
Tropical Storms

Not available

Natural catastrophe: A strong earthquake or
seaquake (followed by a strong tsunami) hits a
developing country such as China, India or
Indonesia

2

4

Natural catastrophe:
Earthquakes

Not available

Natural catastrophe: Extreme inland flooding of
the Mississippi, Yangtze, Thames or Rhine
rivers causes direct economic and human
losses and serious disruption downstream

2

2.5

Natural catastrophe:
Inland Flooding

50

Loss of freshwater

2

2

2007

2008
LIKELIHOOD

LIKELIHOOD

SEVERITY

SEVERITY

SOCIETY

SOCIETY
3

5

Pandemics

2

4

Incidence of infectious disease continues to
rise in Africa and rises dramatically in Russia
and South-East Asia (TB and HIV/AIDS)

2.5

5

Infectious disease in
the developing world

3

5

Chronic diseases become widespread in the
developed world

4

4

Chronic disease in
developed countries

4

4

A pandemic disease jumps from the animal
population to humans, with high mortality and
transmission rates following

TECHNOLOGY

TECHNOLOGY
Attack or system failure in CII creates a domino
effect, shutting down IT-dependent applications
in power, water, transport, banking and
finance, and emergency management
Studies reveal health impairment due to
exposure to widely used nanoparticles (paint,
cosmetics, healthcare). Primary impacts on
public health and secondary impacts on
investment in a range of nanotechnologies

3.5

1

Breakdown of critical
information
infrastructure (CII)

3

1

2

1

Emergence of risks
associated with
nanotechnology

2

1

51

Contributors

This report was prepared by the Global Risk Team of
the World Economic Forum, in conjunction with, and
with inputs from, its partners.
Core team
Global Risk Team, World Economic Forum
Charles Emmerson, Associate Director, World
Economic Forum; Editor, Global Risk Report 2008
Viktoria Ivarsson, Team Coordinator
Johanna Lanitis, Research Analyst
Sylvia Lee, Global Leadership Fellow, Environmental
Risks
Fiona Paua, Head of Strategic Insight Teams
Gareth Shepherd, Global Leadership Fellow,
Economic and Financial Risks
Supported by Sean Cleary, Strategic Adviser
Citigroup
John Ingraham, Managing Director, Head of Risk
Aggregation
Maggie Xie, Senior Vice-President, Risk
Aggregation
Marsh & McLennan Companies (MMC)
John Drzik, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Oliver Wyman Group, USA
Matt Elkington, Vice-President, Marsh Risk
Consulting, Marsh, United Kingdom
Chloe Franklin, Project Manager, MMC
International, United Kingdom
David Frediani, Executive Director, MMC
International, United Kingdom
Roland Rechtsteiner, Director, Corporate Risk
Consulting, Oliver Wyman, Switzerland
John Merkovsky, Managing Director, Global
Practice Leader, Marsh Risk Consulting, Marsh
(USA), USA

52

Swiss Re
Esther Baur, Director, Head Issue Management,
Swiss Re, Switzerland
Catherine Burger, Director, Senior Issue &
Partnership Manager, Swiss Re, Switzerland
Kurt Karl, Senior Vice-President, Head of Economic
Research & Consulting, Swiss Re American Holding
Corp., USA
Ivo Menzinger, Managing Director, Head
Sustainability and Emerging Risk Management,
Swiss Re, Switzerland
Christian Mumenthaler, Head of Life & Health
Products, Member of the Executive Board, Swiss
Re, Switzerland
Lisa Wyssbrod, Director, Senior Issue and
Partnership Manager, Swiss Re, Switzerland

The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
Witold J. Henisz, Associate Professor of
Management
Howard Kunreuther, Cecilia Yen Koo Professor;
Co-Director, Risk Management and Decision
Processes Center
Erwann Michel-Kerjan, Managing Director, Risk
Management and Decision Processes Center

Zurich Financial Services
Daniel M. Hofmann, Group Chief Economist
Hanspeter Frei, Global Head Risk Engineering
Geoffrey M. Riddell, Chief Executive Officer, Global
Corporate, and Member of Group Executive
Committee

Participants

Over the past year the Global Risk Network has
engaged with a wider group of experts in workshops
held at The Wharton School in May, in London and
Zurich in July, and in New York in October. These
workshops, along with the risk assessment process
and risk-related sessions in the broader context of
World Economic Forum events in Singapore, Dalian
and elsewhere, have provided broad expertise and
invaluable insight for the writing of the current report.
They are an integral part of the Global Risk
Network’s mandate to originate and support
multistakeholder dialogues to improve understanding
of global risk and to increase the possibilities for risk
mitigation.
We would like to thank participants for their time –
and above all for their insights:
Dan Alamariu, Analyst, Global Macro, Eurasia
Group
Luca Albertini, Managing Director, Swiss Re
Capital Management and Advisery, Swiss
Reinsurance Company
Larry Alberts, Managing Partner, Asia, Director,
Oliver Wyman (MMC)
Heike Allendorf, Director, Global Financial
Institutions, Citigroup
William Anderson, National Intelligence Officer,
Economic and Global Issues, National Intelligence
Council
Karen Avery, Managing Director, Continuity Risk
Practice, Marsh (MMC)
Jamie Azhar, Risk Management Associate,
Citigroup
Ulrich Benterbusch, Director, G8 Summit, German
Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology
Stein Berre, Managing Director, Oliver Wyman
(MMC)
Olivia Bosch, Associate Fellow, International
Security Programme, Chatham House
Stefan Brem, Head of Risk Analysis and Research
Coordination, German Federal Department of
Defence, Civil Protection and Sport
Hans-Kristian Bryn, Director, Corporate Risk
Consulting, Oliver Wyman (MMC)
Christopher Bunting, General Secretary,
International Risk Governance Council (IRGC)
Adrian Butt, Impacts and Adaptation, UK
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs

Martin Caddick, Business Continuity Management
Practice Leader, Marsh (MMC)
Benjamin H. Cohen, Member of Secretariat,
Financial Stability Forum
Blake A. Coppotelli, Senior Managing Director,
Business Intelligence and Investigations, Kroll (MMC)
Patrick M. Cronin, Director of Studies, International
Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS)
Frank Diebold, W.P. Carey Professor of Economics,
University of Pennsylvania
Patrick Dill, Vice President, Emerging Risk
Management, Swiss Re
Thomas Epprecht, Director, Risk Engineering
Services, Swiss Re
Alex Evans, Senior Research Fellow, Center on
International Cooperation (CIC)
Gareth Evans, President, International Crisis Group
Jesse Fahnestock, Climate Policy Team, Vattenfall
Jean Fournier, Managing Director, Innovation,
Marsh & McLennan Companies (MMC)
Leon Fuerth, Research Professor of International
Affairs, George Washington University
Tina Gabbrielli, Director, US Department of
Homeland Security
Rafael Gil-Tienda, Chairman, Asia, Marsh &
McLennan Companies (MMC)
Rafael Gomes, Deputy Director, Political Risk,
Exclusive Analysis
Marc-Alexandre Graf, Risks Analyst, Federal Office
for Civil Protection
Robert L. Grenier, Managing Director, Kroll (MMC)
Gary Guzy, Global Practice Leader for Climate Risk
and Sustainability, Senior Vice-President, Marsh Risk
Consulting, Marsh & McLennan Companies (MMC)
Beat Habegger, Senior Researcher, Center for
Security Studies, ETH Zurich
Robert Hall, Vice-President, Risk Consulting
Practice, Marsh & McLennan Companies (MMC)
Scott Harrington, Health Care Systems and
Insurance Risk Management, The Wharton School,
University of Pennsylvania
Melissa Hersh, Vice-President, Risk Intelligence
Strategies & Resiliency Solutions, Marsh &
McLennan Companies (MMC)
Charles Hollis, Managing Director, Consulting
Services Group, Kroll (MMC)
John Huff, Managing Director, Claims & Liability
Management, Swiss Re

53

John Hurrell, Head of Risk Consulting Practice
EMEA, Marsh & McLennan Companies (MMC)
Brian Ivanovic, Senior Vice President, L&H
Products, Swiss Re
Jason Johnston, Robert G. Fuller Jr Professor of
Law and Director, Program on Law, the Environment
and the Economy, University of Pennsylvania Law
School
Steve Kobrin, Professor of Multinational
Management, The Wharton School, University of
Pennsylvania
Gary Lynch, Managing Director, Global Leader Risk Intelligence Strategies and Resiliency Solutions,
Risk Consulting Practice, Marsh & McLennan
Companies (MMC)
Thierry Malleret, Partner, Rainbow Insight
Gregoire Mauchamp, Director, Insurance and
Pensions Structured Solutions, Citigroup
Robert Meyer, Gayfryd Steinberg Professor;
Professor of Marketing; Chairperson, Marketing
Department; Co-Director, Risk Management and
Decision Processes Center, The Wharton School,
University of Pennsylvania
Christoper Michaelson, Director, Governance,
Risk & Compliance, PricewaterhouseCoopers
Frederick Morlaye, Senior Vice President,
European Capital Market Group, Guy Carpenter &
Company (MMC)
Herbert Oberhänsli, Head, Economics and
International Relations, Nestlé
Ryan Ogaard, Global Practice Leader - Instrat, Guy
Carpenter & Company (MMC)
Christian Pedersen, Director, Finance & Risk,
Mercer Oliver Wyman (MMC)
Jean-François Rischard, Vice-President, Europe,
World Bank (1998-2005)
Stephen Roberts, Senior Vice-President, Risk
Consulting Practice, Marsh & McLennan Companies
(MMC)
Melinda Roth, Head of the Integrated Risk
Management team, World Bank
Armen Sarkissian, President and Founder, Eurasia
House International
Ross Schaap, Analyst, Asia, Eurasia Group
Pierre-Alain Schieb, Counsellor, Advisory Unit to
the Secretary-General, Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD)

54

Lynn Slepski, Deputy Director, Office of Risk
Management and Analysis, US Department of
Homeland Security
Rosie Smith, Economist, UK Department for
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
David Steven, Managing Director, River Path
Associates
John Stroughair, Managing Director, Corporate
Risk, Oliver Wyman (MMC)
Rolf Tanner, Head of Socio-Political and Risk
Research, Swiss Re
John Tesh, National Risk Assessment, United
Kingdom Government
Leo Tomlin, Pakistan Desk, Foreign and
Commonwealth Office of the United Kingdom
Maryam Umar, Risk Management Associate,
Citigroup
Mike Useem, Professor of Management and
Director, Center for Leadership and Change
Management, The Wharton School, University of
Pennsylvania
Philippe Velard, Advisor, Operational Risk Financial Institutions, Marsh & McLennan
Companies (MMC)
Gary G. Venter, Managing Director, Guy Carpenter
Inc.
David G. Victor, Professor of Law and Director,
Program on Energy and Sustainable Development,
Stanford University
Martin Weymann, Vice-President, Emerging Risk
Management, Swiss Re
Dickie Whitaker, Managing Director, Guy
Carpenter & Company (MMC)
Nathalie Wlodarczyk, Deputy Director of Analysis,
Exclusive Analysis
Ngaire Woods, Director, Global Economic
Governance Programme
Keith Woolnough, Vice-President, L&H Risk
Management, Swiss Re
Justin Wolfers, Assistant Professor of Business
and Public Policy and Faculty Research Fellow, The
Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
Ann Wyman, Managing Director, Economic and
Political Strategies, Citigroup

The World Economic Forum is an independent
international organization committed to improving
the state of the world by engaging leaders in
partnerships to shape global, regional and
industry agendas.
Incorporated as a foundation in 1971, and based
in Geneva, Switzerland, the World Economic
Forum is impartial and not-for-profit; it is tied to
no political, partisan or national interests.
(www.weforum.org)

