ISSN 1020-1753 P0806/E15,500/5.08 - Printed by Stilgrafica srl - Roma

World Food
Programme
2007

Division of Communications
and Public Policy Strategy

Via Cesare Giulio Viola, 68/70 - 00148 Rome, Italy
Tel.: +39-066513-2628 • Fax: +39-066513-2840
E-mail: wfpinfo@wfp.org

wfp.org

World Food Programme - Annual Report 2007

World Food Programme

Be part of the solution

Table of Contents
2

4
5

7

8

Notes

PREFACE BY THE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR

Acronyms used:

2007 IN REVIEW
Extreme weather patterns and natural
disasters
Soaring food and fuel prices

WFP by numbers

10 FOCUS - THE BANGLADESH
CYCLONE
11 The cyclone strikes

CERF

Central Emergency Response Fund

LDC

least-developed country

CP

country programme

LIFDC

low-income food-deficit country

CRED

Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters

LRT

Logistics Response Team

DEV

development project

MDG

Millennium Development Goal

ECW

Enhanced Commitments to Women

NGO

non-governmental organisation

EMOP

emergency operation

P4P

Purchase for Progress

FAO

Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations

PRONAA

Programa Nacional de Asistencia Alimentaria
(Peru)

GTZ

Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit

PRRO

protracted relief and recovery operation

HEB

high-energy biscuit

SO

special operation

UNDP

United Nations Development Programme

UNESCO

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization

IDD

iodine deficiency disorder

IDP

internally displaced person

IFAD

International Fund for Agricultural Development

UNFPA

United Nations Population Fund

ILO

International Labour Organization

UNHCR

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees

UNICEF

United Nations Children’s Fund

UNIFEM

United Nations Development Fund for Women

UNJLC

United Nations Joint Logistics Centre

WHO

World Health Organization

IPCC

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

IRA

Immediate Response Account

JP

joint programme

LACERN

Latin America and Caribbean Emergency
Response Network

WFP’s immediate response

General notes:

Preparedness saved lives

One billion equals 1,000 million.
All quantities of food commodities are in metric tonnes, unless otherwise specified.

13 An emergency operation for the
worst affected

Direct expenditures include food, landside transport, storage and handling, direct support costs, external transport and other direct
support costs components, but exclude indirect support costs and Programme Support and Administrative budget costs.
In some tables, totals do not exactly add up because of rounding.

14 Looking ahead to the
second phase

18 Flooding in Mexico
Peru earthquake

16 EMERGENCIES: REACHING
THE HUNGRY
17 Hurricanes and floods in Latin
America and the Caribbean
Nicaragua battered by Hurricane
Felix
18 Tropical Storm Noel hits the
Dominican Republic

20 Weather-related challenges
in Africa

Low-income food-deficit countries (LIFDCs) include all food-deficit (net cereal-importing) countries with a per capita income below the
historical ceiling used by the World Bank to determine eligibility for International Development Association (IDA) assistance and for
20-year International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) terms; the designation LIFDC is applied to countries included
in World Bank categories I and II. The historical ceiling of per capita gross national product (GNP) for 2005, based on the World Bank Atlas
method, is US$1,675. In 2007, 82 countries were classified by FAO as LIFDCs.
The United Nations category of least-developed countries (LDCs) includes “those low-income countries (LICs) that are suffering from
long-term handicaps to growth, in particular low levels of human resource development and/or severe structural weaknesses”. In 2007,
50 countries were classified as LDCs by UN-OHRLLS, the United Nations Office of the High Representative for LDCs, Landlocked
Developing Countries (LLDCs) and Small Island Developing States (SIDS).

Photo credits

Uganda floods
21 Meeting the challenges of climate
change in the Sahel
22 POST
OST-EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS
OPERATIONS – THE
THE
IMPORTANCE
IMPORTANCE OF
OF SCHOOL
SCHOOL FEEDING
FEEDING

COVER: WFP/Shehzad Noorani; TABLE OF CONTENTS: Bangladesh WFP/GM Akash; Page 2: Nepal, WFP/James Giambrone; Page 3: Sudan, UNMIS/Tim McKulka;
Page 4: Burundi, WFP/Stephanie Savariaud; Page 6: Dominican Republic, WFP/Alejandro Lopez-Chicheri; Page 7: Dominican Republic, WFP/Alejandro LopezChicheri; Page 10: Bangladesh, WFP/GM Akash; Page 11: Bangladesh, WFP/GM Akash; Page 12: Bangladesh, WFP/GM Akash; Page 13: Bangladesh, WFP/
GM Akash; Page 14: Bangladesh, WFP/GM Akash; Page 15: Bangladesh, WFP/GM Akash; Page 16: Dominican Republic, WFP/Alejandro Lopez-Chicheri;
Page 17: Dominican Republic, WFP/Alejandro Lopez-Chicheri; Page 19: Peru, WFP/Anibal Solimano; Page 20: Uganda, WFP/Marcelo Spina; Page 21: Mauritania,
WFP/Marcus Prior; Page 22: Mauritania, WFP/Marcus Prior; Page 23: Mozambique, WFP/ Michael Huggins; Page 24: Mali, WFP/Marcus Prior; Page 24: Mali,
WFP/Marcus Prior; Page 25: Nepal, WFP/James Giambrone; Page 26: Ethiopia, Petterik Wiggers/PANOS Pictures; Page 28: Sudan, WFP/Diego Fernandez;
Page 29: Senegal, WFP/Stephanie Savariaud; Page 30: Kenya, WFP/Marcus Prior; Page 32: Somalia, WFP/Kim Fredriksson; Page 34: Kenya, WFP/Marcus Prior;
Page34: Algeria, AFP/Fayez Nureldine; Page 35: Sudan, WFP/Simon Crittle; Page 36: Nepal, WFP/James Giambrone; Page 38: Mozambique, SRS/Mirco Pecci;
Page 39: Mozambique, SRS/Mirco Pecci; Page 40: Bangladesh, WFP/GM Akash.

28 Purchasing in Sudan
ALT IODIZATION
IODIZATION IN
IN SENEGAL
ENEGAL
29 SALT

30 SECURITY CHALLENGES
32 Somalia
33 Kenya
34 BOMB
OMB ATTACK
TTACK ON
ON UN PREMISES
REMISES IN
IN ALGERIA
LGERIA
35 Sudan

23 Adapting to climate change
in Mozambique

36 FUNDING AND RESOURCES
37 Uneven funding and global food aid

24 EXECUTIVE
XECUTIVE DIRECTOR
IRECTOR IN
IN MALI
ALI
25 Sustaining livelihoods in Nepal

38 UNITED NATIONS REFORM PROCESS
39 Joint Programming

26 BUYING FOOD IN DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES
40 ANNEXES
27 Meeting traders at the Addis Grain
Exchange - The Power of Local
Purchase

Preface by the Executive Director
year 2007 was marked by the
increasingly familiar cycles of natural
disasters, but also by a new and very different
emergency, one with no single cause. By the end
of the year, rising food and fuel prices threatened
to push millions more people into hunger, driving
up the cost of providing life-saving food assistance.

The

These price pressures converged with other
challenges including increased frequency and
scope of natural disasters, tightening commodity
markets, declining levels of food aid in a post-food
surplus era and skyrocketing energy costs.
WFP stepped up, providing 86.1 million people
in 80 countries with life-saving food assistance,
helping hundreds of communities gain access
to food and thus re-establish food security.

First, we do whatever it takes to get the job done.
We will use planes, trucks, bicycles, camels, yaks or
elephants to get food to the hungry. I like to say that
nothing gets between WFP and a hungry person.

We provided food to people caught in emergencies
including conflicts and crises such as in Sudan,
where WFP assisted up to 3 million beneficiaries in
Darfur alone, the cyclone that struck Bangladesh,
the earthquake in Peru, the flooding across Africa
and the destruction left by hurricanes and flooding
throughout Latin America.

Second, the power of local purchase. In 2007, WFP
spent a record US$612 million buying food in
69 developing countries – 30 percent more than we
spent the year before. In addition to investing in
developing country economies, local purchases also
provided much-needed income for farmers,
encouraged the development of local markets and
saved WFP money on transportation and associated
costs. We are now trying to take our procurement
practices a step further, using our expertise to replicate
what contributes most to small farmers.

In 44 emergency operations and 69 protracted
relief and recovery operations, WFP’s preparedness,
logistics and rapid response capabilities were
crucial.
In 2007 – and during my first nine months at WFP –
I travelled deep into the field, where I witnessed the
destruction caused by both humans and nature, and
the effect on the lives and livelihoods of men,
women and children. The good news is that I also
witnessed how WFP – the world’s largest
humanitarian organization – uses its comparative
advantages to respond. Throughout those travels,
I was struck by four areas of strength.

Third, I have been struck by the power of school feeding.
As I have travelled around the world to some of the
most remote villages, I have seen how a humble cup of
porridge brings smiles to the faces of more children than
I can count. Rewarding to be sure, but the benefit goes
well beyond those smiles – to the education, health and
future of those children who will one day head their

2

However, globally high food and transportation costs
stretched WFP’s resources, widening the hunger gap,
as we provided 17.5 percent less food to 2 percent
fewer people in 2007 than in the previous year.

own families and maybe their own communities. In
2007, WFP reached 19.3 million children through school
feeding for a total cost of US$318 million. With food
prices rising, we see these programmes as an ever more
critical part of the safety net.

Though the challenges will no doubt continue in 2008,
our goal is to reverse this trend. The world cannot
afford to lose ground on the successes achieved thus
far on the first Millennium Development Goal – to cut
the proportion of hungry in half by 2015.

Last but certainly not least of these strengths is the
commitment and dedication of WFP’s battlehardened staff of more than 9,000 individuals who
work on the front lines in some of the most remote
and inaccessible areas of the world. Events in 2007
served as a reminder of the dangerous security
conditions confronting WFP. The tragic deaths of
WFP staff in Algiers and Sudan, and the arrests
and detentions in Somalia recall the incredible
commitment and sacrifice staff members make each
day; they and their families give so much to ensure
life-saving assistance reaches the world’s most
vulnerable.

As WFP renews its strategic priorities for the coming
years, it also recommits itself to fighting against hunger
and assisting those most in need, because ending
hunger is perhaps the greatest challenge and
opportunity of our time.

But doing so naturally requires resources and
contributions which were considerable in 2007,
exceeding US$2.7 billion, allowing us to meet more
than 91 percent of budgeted need.

Josette Sheeran
Executive Director

3

2007
in Review

4

work throughout 2007 was
influenced by a fast evolving external
environment that escalated food insecurity throughout
the world. Contributing factors included disrupted
weather patterns and related frequent natural disasters,
soaring food and transport costs, declining food stocks
and reduced global levels of food assistance.

WFP’s

Internally, WFP began positioning itself for the next
decade, embarking upon an extensive consultation
process to strengthen its role as a prime actor in both
humanitarian response and in eradicating global
hunger. Crucial to accelerating progress in fighting
hunger is reducing the humanitarian assistance gap
between crises and long-term solutions. Within this
context, WFP’s work was squarely framed within the
United Nations reform process.
New areas and incidents of food insecurity, owing
to rising prices and more frequent natural disasters,
emerged as a major risk with local, national and global
consequences and a disproportionate impact on poor
communities and countries. Global grain stocks were
at a 25-year low, making the world food supply
vulnerable to crises and natural disasters.

EXTREME WEATHER PATTERNS
AND NATURAL DISASTERS
In 2007, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) documented, in its fourth and final
report, that temperatures were rising across the globe,
threatening ecosystems and poor people’s capacity
to adapt to escalating threats. The IPCC forecasts
significant losses in Africa’s gross domestic product,
higher levels of malnutrition, increased stress on water
resources, and reductions in crop yields. According
to the IPCC, the warming planet is already altering
long-established weather patterns and producing
an increase in extreme events.

5

2007 in Review

WFP’s largest response in 2007 was for the cyclone
and subsequent flooding that struck Bangladesh
in November. Other disasters that required a WFP
emergency response in 2007 included Hurricane
Felix in Nicaragua, Hurricane Dean in the Caribbean,
Tropical Storms Noel and Olga in the Dominican
Republic, Typhoon Durian in the Philippines,
cyclones in Pakistan and Mozambique, earthquakes
in Peru and widespread flooding that cut a
destructive swathe across West, Central and
East Africa.

Natural disasters have been increasing in frequency
and intensity for more than a decade, according to the
Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters
(CRED). While there was a dip in 2007, the longer-term
trend has been sharply upward since the 1990s and
most of the indicators suggest that this trend is likely
to continue. The number of natural disasters rose from
200-250 per year in the mid-1990s to 400-450 a year
in 2000-2005. In 2006, CRED recorded 483 disasters.
The figure for 2007 was down slightly to 441.
For WFP, the changing climate is not an abstract
concept but an ongoing reality. WFP responded to
natural disasters in 19 countries in 2007. The
organisation launched 23 single country and regional
emergency operations (EMOPs) and five special
operations (SOs) to come to the aid of nearly
7 million victims of floods, wind storms, earthquakes
and droughts. Total approved budgets for all of these
operations were more than US$109 million.

WFP also helped vulnerable communities build
resilience and adaptive capacity to extreme weather
events. During the year, WFP stepped up ongoing
efforts to help the poor adapt to the impacts of
severe weather with asset creation activities aimed
to protect and ensure that fragile food-security
systems remained intact.

6

US dollar simply did not go as far, resulting in less
food in the pipeline for hungry people around
the world.
For WFP, the overall cost of reaching a hungry person
was 50 percent higher on average in 2007 than it was
in 2002. Over the five-year period, wheat rose by
63 percent, rice 61 percent and maize 45 percent.
The price of maize was 50 percent higher in late 2007
than during the previous 12 months. Higher
commodity prices and tight grain markets carried
some benefits but considerable drawbacks for the
poorest. Farmers in the poorest countries, lacking the
capacity to reach markets, were hit hard by higher
food prices, as were the urban poor.
High prices presented what Sheeran dubbed the
‘new face of hunger’  people who could afford
enough bread at 30 US cents per loaf, but not at
60 US cents. These people might live in areas where
food on the shelves in their local market was abundant,
but beyond their means. In short, whole swathes
of the world’s population were beginning to be
priced out of the market.

SOARING FOOD AND FUEL PRICES
In June 2007, WFP Executive Director Josette Sheeran
warned that we were facing a perfect storm for the
world's most vulnerable. By the end of 2007, the
storm was brewing and WFP, like a canary in a
coalmine, was one of the first to see the effects on
its pipeline.

Transport costs also increased rapidly during the
same five-year period, with the price of oil rising by
165 percent and freight rates by 40 percent. The
confluence of both high oil prices and high world
prices for grains made the operating environment
for WFP – with its significant logistical apparatus and
large purchases on the open market – much more
challenging. In 2007, WFP transported nearly
2 million tons of food assistance by sea at a cost of
US$235 million. WFP’s Shipping Unit has made inroads
in obtaining competitive rates in a volatile industry
affected by fuel prices and an imbalance in supply
and demand. The imbalance in cargo flows has, in
some cases, been successfully leveraged by WFP,
for example, moving rice at US$1 per ton from
Karachi to Bangkok.

Increasing global demand for food hit WFP hard 
in two basic ways.
First, rising demand sent prices skyward, which
naturally meant that it was more expensive for WFP
to reach the hungry. After decades of food prices in
a virtual free fall, the year saw a sharp rise for those
crops that supply half of the world’s calories. The
price of wheat doubled, reaching a record high
US$400/mt. Maize soared as well, also attaining
record highs, along with a host of other food
commodities, including rice, barley, soya, peas,
lentils, sunflowers and dairy products. Second, the

7

WFP by Numbers
2006

2007

KEY NUMBERS

MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOAL 1 Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
BENEFICIARIES
87.8

86.1

million hungry people in 80 countries (78 in 2006)

24.3

23.8

million in development projects (DEVs)

16.4

15.3

million in emergency operations (EMOPs)

(7.7

8.1)

-

million in conflict situations

(7.9

7.2)

-

million in natural disasters

47.1

47.0

million in protracted relief and recovery operations (PRROs)

72.9

71.6

million women and children

1.9

1.9

million refugees

7.2

8.8

million internally displaced people (IDPs)

1.2

0.8

million returnees

ACTIVE PROJECTS
IN 2007
CPs
DEVs
EMOPs
PRROs
SOs
TOTAL

QUANTITY OF FOOD AID
4.0

3.3

million mt of food distributed

2.0

2.1

million mt of food procured

35
19
44
69
33
200

APPROVED PROJECTS IN 20071
9

6

country programmes (CPs) valued at US$116 million

1

10

DEVs, valued at US$105 million

20

32

EMOPs/Immediate Response Account (IRA), valued at US$880 million

18

31

PRROs, valued at US$2.1 billion

15

14

special operations (SOs) valued at US$59 million

INCOME AND EXPENDITURES (US$ billion)
2.705

2.705

in contributions received

2.932

3.029

in income

2.664

2.753

in direct expenditures

2.876

2.966

in total expenditures

90.6

88.5

DEVELOPING COUNTRIES AND WFP ASSISTANCE
percent of allocated development multilateral resources meeting country
concentration criteria

68.8

74.0

percent of allocated development resources reached LDCs

77.0

79.4

percent of food procured, by tonnage, in developing countries

73.9

72.0

percent of WFP’s assistance invested in sub-Saharan African countries
1

ISC are not included.

8

2006

2007

KEY NUMBERS

MDG 2 Achieve universal primary education
19.4
47.9
6.0

19.3
46.6
6.0

90.0

93.0

million schoolchildren received school meals/take-home rations
% were girls
% increase rate of change in absolute enrolment for children in schools
with WFP school feeding programmes
% of days children attended school throughout the year with school feeding
programmes

MDG 3 Promote gender equality and empower women
51.4
375
5.5

52.2
240
5.1

4.7

4.2

% of beneficiaries were women or girls
thousand women were in leadership positions on food management committees
million women received household food rations at distribution points in general
food distributions
million household food entitlements were issued in women’s names for general
food distributions

MDG 4 Reduce child mortality
55.4
9.9

53.6
5.7

million children were assisted in WFP operations
million malnourished children received special nutritional support

MDG 5 Improve maternal health
1.5
89

2.0
98

million vulnerable women received additional nutritional support
% of pregnant and lactating mothers surveyed received WFP micronutrient-fortified food
(ECW I.1)2

MDG 6 Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
21
8.4
51

20
1.8
50

of the 25 highest HIV and AIDS prevalence countries received WFP assistance
million people affected by HIV and AIDS received WFP food assistance
countries received assistance for TB and HIV and AIDS prevention activities

MDG 7 Ensure environmental sustainability
28.0

17.1

million people received WFP food as an incentive to build assets, attend training,
build resilience to shocks and preserve livelihoods

MDG 8 Develop a global partnership for development
14
9
20
84

15
12
8
84

3,264

2,816

stand-by partners
FAO/WFP Crop and Food Supply Assessment Missions conducted
UNHCR/WFP Joint Assessment Missions conducted
corporate and private entities provided support donating cash and in-kind
gifts worth US$94.5 million
NGOs worked with WFP
2

9

Enhanced Commitments to Women Baseline Survey.

Focus

The Bangladesh
Cyclone

10

THE CYCLONE STRIKES

Within 48 hours, WFP, with its NGO partners, had
reached 654,000 people.

the evening of 15 November, after whipping
itself into a Category 4 tropical storm over
the Bay of Bengal, Cyclone Sidr hit the coast of
Bangladesh, bringing floods, destruction and
devastation in its wake. Winds of up to 240 km
per hour lashed the shore, flattening houses and
businesses, wrecking bridges and bringing a torrent
of floodwater that laid waste to crops and washed
away roads.

On

PREPAREDNESS SAVED LIVES
The key to this quick response was being ready. When
a cyclone of approximately the same magnitude last hit
Bangladesh in 1991, loss of life totalled 80,000. Back
then, preparedness measures were minimal and the
disaster took the country by surprise.

Some 3,800 people were killed, along with thousands
of heads of livestock, while some 4.7 million more
people lost property, homes or livelihoods. The
Government of Bangladesh estimated the total cost
of the damage at more than US$2.2 billion.

This time, WFP’s disaster preparedness and response
team in Bangladesh had been tracking the cyclone’s
path for a week before it struck. WFP’s Vulnerability
Analysis and Mapping Unit had prepared vulnerability
maps which could be used to assess the numbers
of people in the cyclone’s path. This information, along
with the Government’s own early warning system,
meant that some 3.2 million people were evacuated
from the danger zone.

WFP’S IMMEDIATE RESPONSE
Thanks to strengthened Government measures
to prepare for disasters, WFP was able to immediately
swing into action with emergency interventions.
Pre-positioning of stocks close to vulnerable areas
and stand-by agreements with partners enabled WFP
to reach the first beneficiaries within six hours of the
disaster striking with 416 metric tonnes of high-energy
biscuits (HEBs) and 750 metric tonnes of rice to
100,000 people in the worst-affected areas.

These and other longer-term preparedness measures,
including the construction – with the help of WFP –
of dykes, embankments and emergency shelters and
a radio alert system, all helped save tens of thousands
of lives. Last but not least, many thousands of
volunteers were immediately on hand to assist with
evacuation and relief supply.

“There is no doubt that the steps
taken to prepare for and mitigate
against a disaster of this kind
saved tens of thousands
of lives.”
Tony Banbury, Asia Regional Director

11

Focus - The Bangladesh Cyclone

12

AN EMERGENCY OPERATION FOR THE WORST
AFFECTED
Eleven days after the disaster, WFP and FAO
headquarters approved an EMOP valued at
US$51.8 million to supply 2.3 million of the worst
affected people of Bangladesh with food for six
months. Previous surveys in Bangladesh had showed
consistent malnutrition spikes occurring some
months after a disaster.
Surveys also showed that in the wake of a cyclone,
there was likely to be a “double peak” in the affected
areas, with a first surge two to three months after the
disaster, largely due to diarrhoea and infectious
diseases, and a second surge due to food insecurity
before the harvest.
The UN’s two emergency response funds, the IRA and
the Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF), supplied
the initial financing for the operation (US$18.5 million)
and the response from government donors was
generous at the outset. By 31 December, 80 percent of
total needs had been obtained with the result that the
emergency operation was fully covered for the first
phase and beyond.
By the end of the year, WFP had provided more than
12,000 tons of food, including HEBs, rice, pulses, oil and
salt. While most of the deliveries had been by road,
Bangladesh Air Force helicopters and naval vessels had
also been deployed to reach areas inaccessible by land.

13

Focus - The Bangladesh Cyclone
LOOKING AHEAD TO THE SECOND PHASE
In mid-December, WFP and its partners carried out an
Emergency Food Security Assessment among more
than 600 households, 200 traders and more than
60 community leaders to examine the effectiveness
of relief operations and to help plan the second phase.
The survey uncovered a number of factors, particularly
rising food prices and alarmingly high rates of acute
malnutrition, which strongly suggested that food
distributions should continue through May, when the
next rice harvest (Boro crop) was due. Such assistance
could help to secure the food needs of the worst
affected and most food-insecure families in the
cyclone-affected area, and thus help could prevent
suffering associated with hunger, malnutrition
and the further deterioration of livelihoods.

14

15

Emergencies:

Reaching the
Hungry

16

HURRICANES AND FLOODS IN LATIN
AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

At roughly the same time, two-month rations for
5,000 people, consisting of rice, pulses, vegetable oil
and HEBs, were quickly transported to Belize from
the nearby hub in El Salvador.

contrast to the year before, weather-related
emergencies in Latin America and the
Caribbean increased significantly in 2007. This
represented another warning that WFP and the region
as a whole will have to come to grips with natural
disasters as a result of climate change.

In

NICARAGUA BATTERED BY
HURRICANE FELIX
On September 4, Hurricane Felix unleashed
destructive 270 km-per-hour winds on the northern
Caribbean coast of Nicaragua, virtually flattening the
area and uprooting most vegetation including fruit
trees and crops. A total of 185,000 inhabitants were
affected by the Category 5 hurricane which
destroyed almost 10,000 homes.

At the same time, the renewed disaster activity
underscored the importance and benefits of ensuring
effective levels of preparedness both within WFP
Country Offices as well as within national and regional
disaster response mechanisms. For the past few years,
WFP has been steadily building and refining its
response capacity throughout the region and in 2007
was able to benefit from this.

Floodwaters damaged parts of key roads and swept
away the ferry and barge at a major river crossing
leaving most of the region cut off. WFP was able to
respond the first day within six hours of the “all clear”
because it was able to borrow from existing foodstocks and had pre-positioned fortified food in the
coastal community of Puerto Cabezas.

By fostering partnerships, engaging in preparedness
activities, and building a network of sub-regional
emergency hubs in Ecuador, El Salvador and Barbados,
WFP was able to effectively respond to weather-related
disasters, even in countries where it had no presence.
On August 22, when Hurricane Dean had grown into
a massive Category 5 storm, it cut a destructive path
through the Caribbean and affected over 170,000
people, mainly in Jamaica and Belize. WFP was able
to rush close to 9 tons of HEBs to Jamaica from its
Barbados hub and to assist over 22,000 needy victims.

WFP had previously carried out emergency capacity
development exercises for civil defence and relevant
government personnel in the Central American
region including Nicaragua under its Latin America
and Caribbean Emergency Response Network
(LACERN) project which was funded primarily by the
United States and Spain. To overcome damaged
roads, the Country Office began a series of airlifts
to deliver food along the coast and to river
communities. In the coming days, WFP launched a
nine-month emergency operation to assist as many
as 80,000 people, particularly vulnerable groups as
they began to rebuild their shattered lives.

17

Emergencies: Reaching the Hungry
TROPICAL STORM NOEL HITS THE
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

FLOODING IN MEXICO
Massive flooding in the Mexican state of Tabasco
in early November generated world-wide news
coverage when as many as one million inhabitants
in the capital city of Villahermosa suddenly found their
homes partly or entirely underwater.

At the end of October, record rainfall as a result of
Tropical Storm Noel caused widespread flooding, loss
of life, damage to homes and infrastructure as well as
destruction of crops in 26 of the country’s 32 provinces.
More than 100,000 people were affected with
55,000 of them identified as needing assistance.

In some cases, the floodwaters were as high as five
meters, with whole families huddled on the top floors
of buildings along with chickens, pigs, dogs and cats.

As a first step, WFP brought in emergency food
supplies from neighbouring countries, including the
Barbados sub-regional humanitarian hub. WFP was
able to transport the urgently needed supplies to the
affected areas by working closely with the Government
and the local Red Cross, as well as with logistical
support from the US Coast Guard, the United
Kingdom’s Royal Navy and the armed forces of
the Dominican Republic.

An emergency assessment and logistics team flew
to the area and a five-truck caravan carrying 100 tons
of HEBs was dispatched from the sub-regional hub
in El Salvador.
Although WFP had long ago closed its office in
Mexico, the decision to assist was motivated by the
urgency of the situation as well as by Mexico’s history
of generous involvement in emergencies affecting
other countries in the region. It was also a sign of the
growing trend towards increased mutual support
among countries in the hemisphere, a trend that
WFP has been nurturing through LACERN.

WFP also launched an emergency operation to assist
the affected population for six months with special
attention to pregnant and nursing women as well as
children under five years of age. The EMOP included
food-for-work and training activities to enable victims
to restore lost livelihoods. Equally important, the EMOP
aimed to assist the Government and local communities
to strengthen emergency response for future disasters.
Among other things, WFP supported the strengthening
of a national contingency plan through logistics
training of local counterparts as well as capacity
development in mitigation techniques.

PERU EARTHQUAKE
WFP also had to respond to a non-weather-related
natural disaster – the massive earthquake which hit
the southern coastal city of Pisco on 16 August,
killing over 500 people and injuring more than 1,000.

However, in December, even before the training could
get fully underway, heavy rainfall from tropical storm
Olga caused widespread flooding, forcing more than
60,000 people to evacuate their homes. Once again,
WFP responded with emergency food assistance. This
time, thanks to the availability of more plentiful
supplies, the Government was able to meet the bulk
of the needs while WFP launched a two-month
operation to feed as many as 22,000 people.

The intense quake which measured 7.9 on the
Richter scale, destroyed large swathes of the city and
surrounding communities, leaving over 200,000
people homeless and affecting some 450,000.
Because of its ongoing development operations in
Peru, the WFP Country Office, through its local
counterpart Programa Nacional de Asistencia
Alimentaria (PRONAA), was able to rush emergency

18

Once again, WFP’s network of sub-regional
emergency hubs played an important support role,
most notably by the dispatch of emergency food
supplies from Ecuador aboard aircraft generously
provided by the Government.

food to the affected area within the first 12 hours,
an advantage that helped to avert much unnecessary
suffering.
Despite blocked roads, WFP was able to establish
effective supply routes and laid the groundwork for
its US$6.9 million emergency operation to assist
80,000 of the neediest victims for nine months.

One noteworthy aspect of this operation was the
decision by the Government of Peru to draw on
WFP’s expertise in procurement. Just 48 hours after
the disaster, the WFP Country Office was requested
to purchase food to cover the needs of the entire
affected population. WFP immediately procured
16,600 tons in local markets for a cost of
US$16.5 million and sent it to the communities
most in need.

The operation had two main objectives: first, to
prevent further deterioration of the nutritional status
of the affected population with a special attention
to children under five and lactating women; second,
to restore livelihoods of the affected population
through food-for-work projects, rebuilding houses
and agricultural infrastructure.

19

Emergencies: Reaching the Hungry
WEATHER-RELATED CHALLENGES
IN AFRICA

In some cases, Ugandans displaced by the war in the
North who had returned to their homes after years
in camps, were forced to leave their land once again
as their crops were submerged and their mud houses
crumbled under the advancing waters.

In 2006, many parts of eastern Africa battled through
a drought. In October 2007, the water tables were
turned, and this time it was catastrophic floods which
swept livelihoods away across a huge part of the
continent.

With roads and bridges severed, access to some
areas became an exercise in ingenuity and
practicality. In many instances, WFP was forced to
move small boats up country to assist with ferrying
food and other vital supplies across swollen rivers
and floodplains. A special operation valued at
US$5 million was swiftly drafted to operate trucks,
boats and aircraft on behalf of the entire
humanitarian community responding to the floods
– a first rate example of WFP assuming its
UN Logistics Cluster lead role.

UGANDA FLOODS
Uganda was particularly badly hit, with tens of
thousands forced from their homes – at least
300,000 people were estimated to be in need of
humanitarian assistance.
For the first time in the country, WFP was forced
to launch a food airdrop operation to reach people
cut off by the flooding. Most acutely in need
were some 250,000 people living in camps in
northern Uganda, dependent on WFP for their
daily food requirements, but marooned by the
rising waters.

Distributions to some of those worst affected by the
floods continued into 2008 as people struggled
to rebuild their lives. The situation is only expected
to improve with the July 2008 harvest.

20

MEETING THE CHALLENGES OF CLIMATE
CHANGE IN THE SAHEL

low birth-weight babies also play an important role
in malnutrition.

More young children die in the northern Sahel
countries of Niger, Mauritania, Burkina Faso, Mali and
Chad than almost anywhere else on earth. Every year in
these countries about 600,000 children die before their
fifth birthday. That’s more than 1,600 child deaths every
day; nearly 70 every hour. For more than half of them,
the underlying cause of death is malnutrition.

WFP joined forces with government authorities,
UNICEF, other UN agencies and NGOs to implement
a package of low-cost, high-impact programmes
addressing household food security, but also health,
nutrition and hygiene education, micronutrient
supplementation, water treatment and parasite
control. Across the northern Sahel, WFP programmes
were expanded and given a stronger nutrition focus.

In 2007, the northern Sahel was in the grip of an almost
unseen emergency. Ironically, the absence of conflict,
with the exception of Chad, has worked against these
countries when it comes to assistance from the
international community. Experience has shown that
people respond more instinctively to victims of
violence than they do to those who just happen to live
in poverty.

WFP worked first to treat children suffering from
moderate acute malnutrition, while UNICEF was
charged with handling the severe cases. Preventative
measures were then reinforced through improved
child feeding, maternal health and household
food security.
At the heart of WFP policy is treatment and
prevention within the community, allowing the
greatest possible reach and the best possible results.

A widespread lack of health services and information
on nutrition, the low status of women and their limited
decision-making power, and the high prevalence of

21

Emergencies: Reaching the Hungry
movements into river areas and build small dams. In
Burkina Faso, WFP undertook a household study which
demonstrated the impact of these activities on the
livelihoods of small farmers living in agriculturally
marginal areas affected by desertification. Improved
water and soil conditions resulted in a longer
production season, increased yields, and development
of horticulture as a cash crop rather than cotton.

And progress has been made. Niger’s acute
malnutrition rates fell from 15.3 percent in 2005 to
10.3 percent a year later, underlining the fact that
malnutrition is treatable and can be beaten.
In the 1970s, 400,000 square kilometres of arable land
disappeared in the Sahel, devoured by the Sahara. Ever
since, the desert has kept advancing.

Climate change is shaping up to be one of WFP’s
biggest challenges of the 21st century. But the fight
to protect the poor from its worst ravages is already
under way.

Thirty years ago in Mali, entire families moved away
from land that had disappeared under the sand to
resettle near the Niger River. Today they are involved in
WFP irrigation and reforestation projects that are part
of a vast government development scheme.
WFP has helped people to irrigate land, grow rice,
replant trees to prevent soil erosion, check dune

Post-emergency operations – the importance
of school feeding
WFP school feeding programmes are also being
rolled out in nomadic schools, at the gateway to
the desert. For hundreds of thousands of children
in the Sahel, these programmes provide a gateway
to literacy and education and can help them
choose new options in a rapidly changing world,
at a time when traditional livelihoods are proving
to be no longer sustainable.
In 2008, WFP plans to expand its school feeding
programmes to reach more than one million school
children in the Sahel.

Preparations were made in 2007 for the launch in
early 2008 of the Fill the Cup campaign, aimed at
raising funds to provide school feeding to the
estimated 59 million children who are currently
enrolled in school but lacking adequate nutritional
support. WFP is urging governments, donors and
other humanitarian actors to combine efforts to
meet this need.

Globally, WFP provided 19.3 million children with
school meals and/or take-home rations in
70 countries in 2007. The support to school feeding
encompasses a range of activities including meals
in classrooms, take-home rations, provision of
micronutrients and support to families.

22

ADAPTING TO CLIMATE CHANGE
IN MOZAMBIQUE

Thanks to WFP support over the past two years,
residents of Zifuva can stay in the area where they
have lived for decades. They don’t have to follow
in the steps of millions of other people who have
abandoned their land, leaving behind ghost villages
and empty fields, to find a better future in the
big cities.

In 2007, Mozambique was hit by a drought, a flood
and a cyclone, substantially contributing to the
number of natural disasters worldwide. For the Zifuva
community, 50 km from Maputo in southern
Mozambique, the only solution was to adapt to
these life-threatening changes.

Once the community’s harvest produces enough
to meet everyone’s needs, they could even earn
some income selling any extra produce. In support
of this, WFP and other UN partners have developed
a project from 2008 onwards to build the capacity
of small-scale farmers to promote and market any
food left over from their harvest. This, in turn, will
help supply WFP’s other programmes in
Mozambique. Zifuva might soon be supplying
food to others still suffering from hunger.

Thanks to a WFP food-for-work programme, Zifuva
now has a deep spring-fed well supplying the
community’s fields. A spring provides a water source
for the reservoir all year round. The water spills
down the hand-hewn dirt canal, to supplement
whatever rain water accumulates. Hand and foot
pumps direct the water from the new reservoir to
the surrounding fields.
Just a short while ago, all these fields were dusty and
dry and the community had to struggle to find food
every day. Now green maize leaves are flourishing in
the field. The leaves are a symbol of hope and
sustenance. According to a saying in Mozambique:
‘If you haven’t eaten maize, you haven’t eaten at all’.

Not only have the residents of Zifuva mastered the
skills to produce food in times of unpredictable
weather and great uncertainty, but they now intend
to reap some benefits from global warming by
growing crops that can be used for biofuels. They
are a living example of the one important rule of
tackling climate change: adaptation is the key.

The new irrigation techniques mean the community
can now eat maize all year. And just behind the
green maize plants, pineapples are flourishing.

23

Emergencies: Reaching the Hungry

Executive Director in Mali
WFP works in many ways and for many reasons
to fight hunger, but at the turn of the 21st century
there is a growing focus on providing a helping
hand to the victims of climate change. So it was in
early November that Executive Director Josette
Sheeran travelled to Timbuktu in Mali, the gateway
to the Sahara desert.

Kabara Women’s Cooperative, which is both
planting trees and creating new rice paddies with
WFP’s help. “We have seen a great change. Before
these projects, we didn’t even leave our homes –
we just waited for our men to come back from
working in the cities. Now our men stay at home,
which is good for our families. The lives of our
whole family have changed for the better.”

It’s a little-known fact even within WFP that foodfor-work programmes over the past decades have
been responsible for planting some five billion trees
in developing countries around the world. At least a
million of those have been planted around
Timbuktu as year by year, the Sahara moves further
south, threatening vital aquifers and devouring
agricultural land.

Sheeran said it was rewarding to see for herself how
WFP is helping the poorest of the poor live their
lives with some faith in the future.

Trees not only prevent the advance of the desert,
but their root systems hold vital nutrients in place
and protect farming land. As Sheeran visited
projects supported by WFP, she witnessed the vital
role they play in holding rural communities
together.

“This is ground zero in the fight against climate
change,” she said as she took in the daily reality of
life in one of the most marginal regions in the
world. “The people of Timbuktu are not
experiencing climate change as some kind of
scientific theory, but as a fact. They have to adapt
now – today – and WFP is here to help them.”

“We’ve reached a stage we never thought possible,”
explained Maiga Zeinabu Cissé, President of the

24

SUSTAINING LIVELIHOODS IN NEPAL

also meant that 477 hectares of cropland were irrigated,
increasing yields, and 500 new trails were constructed,
improving communications and opening up new
possibilities for trading.

Nepal was swept by floods and devastated by drought
in 2007. It was a lethal combination that inflicted
widespread damage on the country. The flooding in
August, provoked by heavy monsoon rains, was the
worst in decades. In less than two weeks, 44 of Nepal’s
75 districts were inundated. The rising waters and
accompanying landslides killed 130 people and
destroyed 70,000 homes.

In the wake of these efforts, rice production rose by
10 percent and 30 percent of beneficiaries gained
access to new or improved trails. In another key
indication of improved prospects, there was a slight
decrease in the number of people leaving their
households in search of food or economic
opportunities.

Even before the rains struck, Nepal was already suffering
serious damage as a result of three consecutive years of
drought. Crops failed completely in many communities,
especially in the middle and far western regions.

Meanwhile, WFP was also assisting the inhabitants of
the southern border districts of the Terai, the area hit
hardest by the flooding. To these people, WFP
distributed general rations which ensured basic
nutrition and therefore freed up family resources for
rebuilding damaged homes and livelihoods.

To survive in this desperate situation, families were
often forced to sell land, animals, household goods and
consume seed stocks. Clearly this put their future
livelihoods at risk. In order to protect those livelihoods,
WFP ploughed a large part of its food assistance into
food-for-work activities.

By the end of 2007, WFP’s emergency operation in
Nepal had provided 543,000 people with more than
8,700 tons of food. Some 70 percent of this food was
used to support work projects which gave flood and
drought victims the chance to take the first steps
towards a more secure future.

These activities, in which workers are paid with food
to build vital new infrastructure, created more than
1,200 small-scale community assets in 10 droughtaffected regions of middle and far-western Nepal. They

25

Buying Food in
Developing
Countries

26

agricultural campaign that generated surpluses.
However, cereal prices did fluctuate, increasing at the
end of 2007 after the last harvest. Nevertheless, the
resilience of cereal and bean prices indicates the
advantages of local and regional purchases.

a continuing effort to help build sustainable
farm economies in developing countries, while
at the same time helping to offset increasing
commodity, fuel and transport costs, WFP also focussed
its efforts to buy more food on local and regional
markets.

In

WFP advanced the Purchase for Progress (P4P) initiative
to assist small-scale farmers with innovations in food
procurement and market development. Under the
plan, which is to be implemented from 2008, WFP will
buy food directly from farmers’ associations and local
traders to help stimulate producer livelihoods with
improved incomes, thereby increasing incentives for
greater production.

A group of 20 farmers in Lesotho last year sold WFP
what was left of their production after they had fed
themselves and their families. It amounted to eight
tons of maize and earned them US$2,800, a sizeable
sum in a country where more than a third of the
population lives on less than US$1 a day.
As a result of the sale, 52-year-old Maleetoane Khali
now has enough money to send her older children
to school and to buy previously unaffordable
necessities like soap and salt. “I am hoping to grow
even more crops in the future so that we never have
to worry about being hungry again and to get more
money to improve our lives,” said Khali, who lives
with her husband and eight children in a tiny village
high in the mountains.

MEETING TRADERS AT THE ADDIS GRAIN
EXCHANGE - THE POWER OF LOCAL
PURCHASE
In her first field visit since taking over as WFP Executive
Director, Josette Sheeran flew to the Ethiopian capital
Addis Ababa in April and headed to Ehil Berenda grain
market – the country’s largest, where up to 600 people
do business every day.

WFP has been procuring food locally for decades and
has spent more than US$1 billion on food purchases in
Africa alone since 2001. Purchasing remained strong
over the year with 80 percent of WFP’s food purchases
emanating from 69 developing countries – 1.6 million
tons at a value of more than US$612 million.

Questioning grain sellers and stall holders, Sheeran
sampled bags of maize, wheat and teff – a greyish
grain, familiar to every Ethiopian as the staple ingredient
in the national dish injera.

WFP has documented that purchasing food locally or
regionally stimulates and supports markets, boosting
local economies and providing farmers with an
incentive to produce more. WFP often can purchase
more cheaply and tailor food baskets to local tastes.

“Procurement of locally produced
food is an exciting and untapped
potential for economic and human
advancement and can have a
positive impact on development
initiatives in many countries.”

For example, in the West Africa region, local prices were
sheltered from the international spike. In Burkina Faso,
prices for locally produced commodities decreased
over the last two years, in part due to a strong

WFP Executive Director Josette Sheeran

27

Buying Food in Developing Countries
Local procurement isn’t easy. Through market analysis
and appropriate timing, WFP local purchases must
avoid causing price rises that hit local consumers.
Defaults by contractors and donor funding constraints
are just a few of the other issues. So before leaving,
Sheeran issued a challenge: “Can we develop better
models for local purchase?”

Grain is the key to life in Ethiopia. Agriculture is the
backbone of the economy, where 85 percent of the
country’s 77 million people live in rural areas and work
at some form of farming. Ethiopia produces more
maize than Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania combined.
The constraints of logistics, access and purchasing
power mean that food is not always available to those
who need it most. Just one-third of the food produced
in Ethiopia reaches a market. Partly because most are
subsistence growers, access to markets by the vast
majority of farmers is cut off by poor roads, public
transport and infrastructure.

PURCHASING IN SUDAN
WFP procured a total of 93,935 tons of food
in Sudan in 2007 as part of its policy of supporting
national grain markets. The bulk of the local
purchase was sorghum and millet, while beans
were also bought in Sudan. WFP purchased almost
all of the salt for its Sudan projects locally,
in Red Sea state.

Local purchase – buying food from surplus areas and
traders and using it to assist people who have no
access to it – could help solve an age-old problem.
And WFP is increasingly one of the major buyers of
food in Ethiopia. In total, WFP bought 53,400 metric
tons of food in Ethiopia valued at US$18.3 million in
2007 for its operations in the country compared to
4,653 metric tons worth US$2.2 million in 1989. In
addition, it has also bought food in Ethiopia for export
to other WFP operations in the region.

The challenge is to work with cash donors to
ensure that the contributions arrive at the best
time to make the purchase, during the postharvest season when prices are low and food
quality is high.

28

iodate, and technical training to 14 Economic
Interest Groups. Three quarters of these small-scale
producers are women, located in five major salt
producing areas.

Salt iodization in Senegal
Everyone knows about salt. It’s a basic commodity
in every household as it enhances flavours and
compliments other spices. But what many may not
realize is the importance of salt in a nutritious diet.
For years, iodized salt has been the simplest way for
individuals to receive a sufficient level of iodine,
fighting health risks such as goitre, mental
retardation in infants, and other iodine deficiency
disorders (IDD).

The producer group of Taanomak-Ndiémou, in
Fatick region and composed entirely of women, has
changed the entire community. Through WFP’s
effort to build the capacity of the women producers,
the local group was selected to supply WFP with
22 tons of quality iodized salt. This salt was further
distributed to 9,000 pregnant and nursing women
receiving assistance in Kaolack and Fatick.

Senegal is one of the most important salt producers
in West Africa, with about 60 percent of national
production in the hands of large, private companies
which export salt to neighbouring countries. The
local market, on the other hand, is mainly supplied
by small-scale producers with a limited capacity
to adequately iodize salt. The result? A 17 percent
goitre rate in Senegal, and 85,000 infants born each
year unprotected against brain damage. These
serious health risks caused by IDD leave many
Senegalese infants and adults facing a life of little
opportunity and continued underdevelopment.

As the number of women actively participating
in the salt iodization initiative increases, it remains
evident that this project does not merely prevent
IDD. It installs in communities a sense of optimism
and a yearning for knowledge. WFP, with the
support of its partners, hopes that this good practice
will continue in neighbouring communities like
Ndiémou. And as this initiative grows, the
communities it reaches will grow more healthy
and hopeful.

While salt iodization has been mandatory since 2000
through a Presidential Decree, 36 percent of
Senegalese households still lacked access to iodized
salt. WFP decided to act. In 2006, a number of
humanitarian agencies including WFP, Micronutrient
Initiative and UNICEF joined forces to promote the
production and consumption of iodized salt under
the coordination of the National Committee against
Malnutrition. This initiative sought to ensure that at
least 90 percent of households in Senegal consume
adequately iodized salt in order to minimize IDD.
By the end of 2007, some 7,000 small-scale
producers had iodized at least 28,500 tons of salt.
This was only made possible by the efforts of WFP
and its partners to provide equipment, potassium

A Senegalese woman carrying a salt bucket that has just been
harvested from Lac Rose.

29

Security
Challenges

30

Sudan, 91 in Liberia and 46 in Somalia. In Asia, there
were 47 security incidents in Afghanistan, 20 in TimorLeste and 16 in Nepal. During the year, armed men
attacked or stopped 66 commercial trucks contracted by
WFP. Most attacks – 42 percent – occurred in Afghanistan,
followed by Sudan – 36 percent. Six drivers were shot
and killed; three in South Darfur, one each in northwestern Kenya, Chad and Afghanistan. Drivers suffered
personal injuries in three attacks and were taken hostage
in five incidents. In 73 percent of attacks on trucks, WFP
assets were lost or damaged. There were also four
trucking incidents involving WFP partners, including one
that left a GTZ worker dead after an ambush in South
Sudan. There were 12 attacks on WFP warehouses during
the year, all resulting in loss or damage to WFP property.

an organisation working in conflict zones and
the deep field, security has always been a major
issue for WFP, with the highest priority given to ensuring
the safety of staff at all times, while continuing to fulfil its
mandate to provide food to the poorest and most
vulnerable, wherever they may be. Unfortunately, in light
of increasing levels of threats, 2007 was marked by
disturbing trends regarding the security of WFP staff and
operations. Security incidents involving staff or assets
rose by 31 percent during the year compared with 2006,
reaching a total of 484 separate cases.

As

Security and safety of staff in
WFP operational areas in 2007
Total staff injured
Total staff detained
Total staff killed

5
18
3

WFP was able to continue operating in these complex
security environments as a result of close cooperation
with partners and continuous efforts to integrate
security functions in all areas of the WFP business
process, especially in programme and logistics. In
Somalia and Chad, security teams worked closely with
programme and logistics to establish, where possible,
good relationships with the local population and
authorities, increasing the level of WFP acceptance and
encouraging a safer environment. Security Officers
were often the only international WFP staff on the
ground in particularly risky environments. In Sri Lanka
and oPt, Security Officers were instrumental in
negotiating access to WFP teams and commodities.
They were also extensively used by Country Offices to
address national staff problems with national authorities.

Work-related incidents increased by 50 percent.
Three staff members were killed in the line of duty,
two more died in traffic accidents and another was
stabbed to death by thieves. Ten staff died due to natural
causes. Eight staff suffered injuries, five while on the job.
There were 26 cases of staff members detained by
various national authorities, of which 46 percent were
work-related. Harassment of staff members by external
actors soared by 60 percent over the previous year,
with 88 percent of incidents occurring in one
country – Sudan.
Staff relocations/evacuations were conducted
successfully in 18 cases, 72 percent of which were
caused by civil unrest. Five relocations occurred in
Sudan, two evacuations and one relocation took place
in Guinea, three relocations happened in Somalia, two
in Nepal, two in Timor-Leste and one each in Sri Lanka,
Lebanon and DR Congo.

In the second quarter of 2007, a deeply troubling
trend emerged in a number of countries with staff
members being often abducted as their vehicles were
stolen. To counter the threat, WFP implemented a
satellite based, round-the-clock GPS tracking system,
which monitored vehicles on operations. To date, all WFP
staff members have been released and most vehicles
have been located.

Africa recorded the highest number of security incidents
– 370 in total. Most occurred in three countries: 119 in

31

Security Challenges
Agencies participating in the UN security management
system assume collective responsibility for the safety
and security of UN personnel. Field costs are
apportioned under a cost-sharing formula, with central
management costs assumed by the UN. WFP’s share for
2008-2009 is projected at US$26.6 million, roughly
double what it was in 2004-2005.

SOMALIA
Even by the harsh standards of the previous 16 years
of civil war, 2007 was a terrible year for the people of
Somalia. Fighting in Mogadishu forced more than
700,000 people – half the capital’s population – to flee
their homes. By November, the United Nations
called Somalia the worst current humanitarian crisis
in Africa.
Conditions for most people deteriorated steadily
throughout the year, but the provision of humanitarian
assistance helped prevent a catastrophe from unfolding.

It was perhaps the worst year ever for piracy off the
Somali coast with the International Maritime Bureau
reporting a total of 31 piracy incidents in 2007 – up
from 10 in 2006. The highest number of kidnappings in
the world were recorded on ships in Somali waters in
2007, with pirates holding 154 crew hostage in
11 hijackings.

With the exodus from Mogadishu and crop failure in
some areas, WFP was forced to increase its original
target from feeding 925,000 people to 1.2 million.
Despite a long list of constantly changing security
challenges, WFP more than met its targets, feeding
1.53 million people in Somalia in 2007 with
82,000 metric tons of food assistance – thanks to
generous donors who refused to abandon the
Somali people.

WFP reacted swiftly to three attacks on ships delivering
WFP food and the killing by pirates of a security guard
contracted by a shipping agent. In May, WFP Executive
Director Josette Sheeran called for international action
to protect shipments. This led to greater surveillance
and intervention by an international naval coalition off
Somalia, and in November to the start of an effective
system where a French frigate escorted ships carrying
WFP food from the Kenyan port of Mombasa to ports
in Somalia and back – the first time WFP ships had
received a naval escort.

The biggest lesson of the year? For WFP it was to always
be ready to respond to fast-changing events such as
violence and the movement of people that follows. And
in what is one of the worst operating environments in
the world for humanitarian agencies, WFP succeeded in
increasing the number of its experienced national and
international staff in Somalia to improve contact with
authorities at all levels and improve security at
distributions.

In October, WFP’s Officer-in-Charge in Mogadishu, Idriss
Osman, was detained for nearly a week for questioning
by the Somali National Security Service. He was

32

dressed the way I came – I have nothing else. We are
sleeping in the open. We need our country to have
peace.”
WFP led the first UN mission into the area, escorted by
the Kenyan military from downtown Nairobi. The signs
of destruction littered the roadside – burnt-out shops
and marketplaces, cars and minibus taxis, homes and
businesses. Roadblocks manned by angry youths
brandishing machetes and bows and arrows barred the
way at several points, but were negotiated without too
much difficulty.

released unharmed and no charges were laid against
him. During his detention, WFP suspended its activities
in Mogadishu.

KENYA
Following fiercely contested elections, and an even
more hotly disputed counting of the votes, Kenya – for
so long East Africa’s beacon of stability and economic
progress – plunged almost overnight into chaos.

Eldoret, at the heart of the affected area, was
comparatively calm, and initial instructions from
security to stay overnight at the local military barracks
were soon softened in favour of a centrally-located
hotel.

The worst of the violence was in the northern Rift
Valley, an area with a history of ethnic tensions. Clashes
had followed previous elections, but never on this
scale. Very quickly, it became clear that thousands of
people were fleeing in fear of their lives, seeking refuge
in police stations, schools and churches and camping
out under clear, chilly night skies. Most had left with
nothing at all.

Given that the region is Kenya’s breadbasket, WFP has
only a sub-office in Eldoret, normally servicing a small
programme of school feeding and people affected by
HIV/AIDS. But the post-election violence had turned
normal life on its head.

“There is no food left – it has all been burnt,” Grace
Omaribo, a 26-year-old mother of two young boys told
WFP. “There are no blankets, no pots and pans. I am

Existing supplies in WFP’s local warehouse were
quickly uploaded onto Kenya Red Cross trucks for

33

Security Challenges

immediate distribution, the Government providing
the bulk of the cereals and WFP the pulses.

Bomb Attack on UN Premises in Algeria
The suicide car-bombing of the main UN offices
in Algiers on 11 December resulted in the death
of 17 UN staff, injury to others and the reduction of
offices to rubble. The attack was a terrible reminder
of the vulnerability of UN staff in areas where the
UN has become a target of radical groups.

Getting other commodities into Eldoret was a
massive challenge. Two trucks of HEBs made it
through roads closed by insecurity from Lodwar in
the north. Another truck packed with corn-soya
blend joined a Red Cross convoy from Nairobi. And a
truck piled with cooking oil which had been stranded
by the mayhem some way south of Eldoret was
located by the logistics team and set on its way
again. In a remarkably short time, and despite
enormous obstacles, WFP had enough to provide
a full food basket.

The irreplaceable loss of WFP’s International
Finance Officer, Gene Luna and the severe injuries
incurred by Programme Officer Lynda Matougui
are deeply deplored by WFP. The event was one
of those rare occasions when WFP had to focus
its emergency response on itself.

The full extent of the crisis was difficult to assess.
Many people were fleeing the area entirely, and
heading south to relatives closer to Nakuru and
Nairobi. In a time of such flux, a two-week ration was
decided upon – enough time to meet immediate
needs, but also to understand what scale and type
of assistance would be necessary in the future.

34

SUDAN

and security divisions. In a new development in 2007,
WFP Field Security started to keep records of incidents
involving non-WFP workers, essentially contractors,
cooperating and stand-by partners.

After four years, the Darfur conflict remains the largest
humanitarian emergency on WFP’s operational agenda.
Despite the signing of the Darfur Peace Agreement in
May 2006, the region remains a patchwork of volatile
areas prone to both armed conflict and banditry.

Despite these challenges, WFP provided monthly food
rations to an average 2.5 million Darfurians per month.

Security risks in Sudan meant that between January
and November 2007, 114,000 beneficiaries per month
could not be reached. The 2007 figures were much
lower than the previous year, when a monthly average
of 225,000 beneficiaries was not reached, despite the
dramatic increase in the security threat. This is a
significant achievement, enabled by security teams
continuously conducting threat and risk assessments,
developing operational continuity plans and
integrating all activities of the programme, logistics

Insecurity was also a factor in southern Sudan, where
the implementation of the 2005 Comprehensive Peace
Agreement between the North and South remains
slow and the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants has yet to be
completed. A WFP driver was killed in January 2007
when the vehicle he was riding in as a passenger was
shot at by unidentified assailants. Three more drivers of
WFP-contracted trucks were killed in Darfur in October.

35

Funding and
Resources

36

UNEVEN FUNDING AND GLOBAL
FOOD AID

them WFP’s fourth highest contributor. The
Programme expects that this type of support to
humanitarian and transitional activities will continue
to be a significant component of its income in years
to come.

hroughout 2007, evidence suggested that
the era of global food surpluses has ended. In
the continuation of a longer-term trend, global food
aid fell by 16 percent in 2007, dropping from
7.0 million mt in 2006 to 5.9 million mt. Between
2003 and 2007 global food aid deliveries fell by
more than 42 percent. WFP’s share of global food
aid remained just over 52 percent in 2007, but
the tonnage decreased from 3.7 million mt
in 2006 to 3.1 in 2007.

T

Overall, 91 percent of planned beneficiary needs
were met in 2007. WFP’s large, well publicized relief
operations were adequately funded, but many
smaller operations suffered from significant funding
shortfalls or pipeline breaks. If all programme
categories are considered, excluding SOs, of
167 active projects 35 percent were fully funded
with no shortfalls.

In early May 2007, a conference was held in Berlin
against the backdrop of a possible new Food Aid
Convention. What emerged is known as the “Berlin
Consensus” – common thoughts on how to attack
world hunger from 100 participants representing
national governments, the European Community,
United Nations agencies and NGOs. The
conference’s main conclusions are of significant
importance to WFP, offering guidelines to gauge
how well the organization’s approach matches
current needs. Among the conference’s chief
findings: a need to maintain a sustained level of
global food aid; and a need to shift from food aid,
often narrowly associated with commodities, to
food assistance, which can include in-kind food
aid, cash to facilitate food transfers and
micronutrients.

But 17 percent of food operations experienced
shortfalls of over 50 percent of planned needs: for
example, Cambodia and Ethiopia suffered both
from shortfalls and timing difficulties; however these
problems affected countries differently.
Most countries tried to maintain beneficiary
numbers by cutting rations to accommodate food
shortfalls during periods with pipeline breaks. Some
countries were in the position to borrow
commodities from other in-country operations or
neighbouring countries or made use of WFP’s
internal advance finance mechanisms.
WFP tried to work more closely with donors to
ensure contributions were provided in a timely
and predictable manner. Funds were still frequently
unavailable in some countries to enable purchases
at optimal periods. Greater savings would have
been achieved, for example, in Pakistan if funds had
been available during the harvest season, when
prices were lower. There were other cases where
purchase requests had to be raised as soon as funds
were received, irrespective of prevailing market
conditions.

In view of this challenging external environment,
common funding mechanisms provided a welcome
and complementary source of support. These
include: CERF, country-level common humanitarian
funds in DR Congo and Sudan, and other multidonor trust funds such as the UN Central Fund for
Influenza Action and the UN Peace Fund for Nepal.
In 2007, WFP received contributions of over
US$143 million from donors through common
funding and joint programming activities, making

37

United Nations
Reform Process

38

JOINT PROGRAMMING

Beyond the “One UN” programme pilots, WFP is involved
in two educational JPs in Afghanistan together with
UNESCO, UNFPA, UNICEF, UNIFEM and WHO. Education
is also the focus of a JP in Egypt, where WFP is
collaborating with UNESCO, UNICEF, UNFPA, ILO and the
World Bank. On HIV/AIDS, joint projects are underway
with multi-agency teams in Madagascar, Malawi,
Namibia and Zambia. WFP is cooperating on JPs in the
field of health and nutrition in Guatemala, Guinea and
Colombia; on disaster risk management JPs in China
and Peru; food security in Lesotho, the environment
in Armenia and Mauritania, poverty reduction in
Bhutan and human rights in Burkina Faso.

2007, WFP significantly increased its participation
in Joint Programming, the collective effort
through which UN organizations and national partners
work together to prepare, implement, monitor and
evaluate activities aimed at achieving the MDGs.

In

During the year, WFP took part in 84 joint
programmes (JPs), an 82 percent increase over the
previous year when the organization participated in
46 JPs. The number of countries involved also
increased from 27 in 2006 to 36 last year. Most of
these collective endeavours involved three
programme areas: HIV/AIDS (14 JPs), education
(13 JPs) and MDGs (11 JPs). Many were connected
with the UN’s “Delivering As One” reform initiative,
particularly in the four pilot countries where WFP
has Country Offices – Mozambique, Rwanda,
Tanzania and Pakistan.

Since its introduction in 2005, the cluster approach,
which aims to increase the coherence and effectiveness
of humanitarian response, has developed. Milestones
during 2007 were: the endorsement of the “Logistics
Cluster Concept and Guidelines”, the formation of
Logistics Response Teams (LRTs) and the diversification
of Support Cell members who have shifted from
functioning as “fire-fighters” to working strategically
in capacity-building and preparedness. Issues under
discussion include “provider of last resort”, the UNJLC
and service provision at field level.

In Mozambique, WFP has been participating in six of
the 11 JPs comprising the “One UN” initiative in the
country. WFP is the lead organization in the JP
Building Commodity Value Chains and Market Linkages
for Farmers’ Associations in cooperation with IFAD and
FAO. The other JPs involving WFP deal with
emergency preparedness, HIV/AIDS, climate change,
social safety nets and mother-and-child health. In
Tanzania, WFP is engaged in six JPs, five with FAO
and the remaining with, among others, IFAD.

WFP continued to co-lead (with UNICEF and OCHA)
the emergency telecommunications cluster, becoming
active in three new emergencies: Ghana,
Mozambique and Pakistan.

39

Annexes

40

41

42

46

2 477

2 190

Ghana

Guinea

583

Liberia

Mauritania

446

7 352

Rwanda

Sao Tome and Principe

6 457

-

Niger

Namibia

10 710

1 210

Mali

Mozambique

6 090

6 205

Malawi

1 773

3 483

Lesotho

Madagascar

15 534

Kenya

-

1 429

Gambia

Guinea-Bissau

11 887

0

671

Ethiopia

Eritrea

Djibouti

Côte d’Ivoire

-

3 110

Chad

Congo, Dem. Rep. of the

1 154

Central African Republic

-

3 649

Cape Verde

Congo

2 757

Cameroon

-6

5 614

Burundi

Burkina Faso

-

2 346

Benin

Angola

Relief

-

8 412

0

2 971

20 568

6 946

1 443

19 915

5 981

35 438

21 892

56 574

3 745

9 493

396

56

147 931

44 917

2 229

19 908

42 613

4 868

31 454

3 436

46

282

41 422

1 248

-

73 486

256 458 1 670 055

SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA

GRAND TOTAL

Development

-

0

-

-

-

-

-

1 051

-

1 780

-

-

-

557

-

-

-

-

-

1 059

43

-

2 317

-

-

-

960

-

-

5 903

60 628

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1 298

-

-

2 740

-

-

-

-

-

-

1 419

14

-

-11

794 372

Special Bilaterals
Oper.

2004

446

15 764

6 457

2 971

31 278

8 156

7 648

27 057

7 754

37 801

25 375

72 107

3 745

12 240

2 873

1 485

161 115

44 917

2 900

23 753

42 656

4 868

36 881

4 590

3 695

3 039

43 795

6 876

2 346

79 377

2 899 628

Total

Relief

768

5 445

6 595

-

13 855

3 888

6 834

6 004

4 472

-1

2 630

16 417

-

3 242

2 818

2 138

25 031

-

1 103

-

-

-

2 460

1 698

557

1 050

-

2 766

2 124

-

-

13 323

37 290

791

31 615

14 973

9 934

54 996

1 796

35 141

19 458

63 551

3 110

9 005

2 099

10

311 209

64 364

3 943

21 892

59 007

3 983

41 806

2 004

-

951

37 603

833

942

43 986

258 884 2 282 892

Development

-

-

184

-

-

-

-

-99

-

150

-

-

-

208

-

-

-

-

-

1 795

3 016

-

5 987

-

-

-

1 096

-

-

6 793

196 724

-

-

-

-

-

-

257

360

693

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

619

-

-

-

-

-

-

2 119

100

-

-2

23

Special Bilaterals
Oper.

2005

768

18 768

44 069

791

45 470

18 861

17 025

61 261

6 960

35 290

22 088

79 968

3 110

12 455

4 918

2 148

336 239

64 364

5 046

24 306

62 023

3 983

50 254

3 702

557

2 001

40 818

3 699

3 067

50 777

2 892 401

Total

Relief

816

5 196

6 602

-

7 504

3 753

3 662

6 743

3 425

-

2 876

17 180

-

3 004

1 892

2 037

19 037

-

1 089

-

-

-

4 271

2 675

932

1 625

-

5 199

2 266

-

-

17 396

31 519

2 488

29 365

9 768

12 662

41 785

525

33 832

7 761

134 400

3 844

7 493

1 369

92

174 461

-9 904

4 208

21 058

43 464

2 748

46 270

4 345

-

1 115

46 029

605

875

21 210

268 210 1 962 307

Development

-

-

35

-

-

-

-

-

-

450

-

1 553

-

165

-

-

882

-

-

2 466

4 409

-

4 767

209

-

-

876

-

-

6 844

236 336

-

-

-

-

2

-

572

136

64

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

267

-

-

-

-

-

0

65

394

-

-

11 764

Special Bilaterals
Oper.

2006

816

22 592

38 157

2 488

36 871

13 521

16 897

48 664

4 014

34 282

10 638

153 134

3 844

10 662

3 261

2 129

194 380

-9 904

5 297

23 791

47 874

2 748

55 308

7 228

932

2 740

46 970

6 199

3 141

28 054

2 664 994

Total

Relief

956

6 794

5 813

-

12 832

4 519

3 544

12 809

3 966

-

1 331

28 532

-

4 149

2 275

1 919

17 836

-

1 488

-

-

-

4 669

2 147

789

1 953

-

4 027

2 336

-

0

8 711

16 853

6 369

22 206

14 693

8 360

30 402

9 327

31 477

10 199

153 561

5 078

6 848

1 838

896

148 862

241

3 125

23 289

71 776

2 808

62 028

19 768

-

1 402

38 257

6 864

528

3 457

309 318 2 005 656

Development

0

-

-

-

2 509

-

-

-

598

3 166

-

8 205

-

929

316

-

164

-

-

270

4 459

-

5 615

3 104

-

-

0

-

-

839

166 244

0

-

-

-

95

-

1 237

1

0

206

128

-

-

14

-

-

2 040

-

-

288

-

-

-

-

-

1

456

855

-

-

272 090

Special Bilaterals,
Oper. Trust Funds
and Others3

2007

956

15 505

22 666

6 369

37 643

19 212

13 142

43 212

13 891

34 850

11 658

190 298

5 078

11 940

4 430

2 815

168 902

241

4 613

23 847

76 234

2 808

72 312

25 019

789

3 356

38 713

11 747

2 864

4 296

2 753 308

Total

Annex 1
DIRECT EXPENDITURES1 BY COUNTRY, REGION AND CATEGORY, 2004-2007 (thousand

-

43

4 062

1 723

2 568

Philippines

Pakistan

-

8 059

12 633

Myanmar

Nepal

-

-

Maldives

Lao, People’s Dem. Rep. of

-

-

9 251

7 867

4 611

-

-136

121 416

-

-

20 911

Korea D.P.R. of

8 690

India

-

Islamabad Cluster

9 296

China

11 221

-

1 264

Cambodia

-

19 502

119 073

Indonesia

3 138

Bhutan

-

28 184

Bangladesh

126 364 1 202 709

70 599

-

Afghanistan

ASIA

TOTAL REGION

Other Regional Expenditure

18 168

83 027

-

27 535

7 999

354 338

-

18 147

9 279

1 885

Relief

178

4 886

Zambia

Zimbabwe

4 714

-

5 231

Uganda

Togo

Tanzania

Swaziland

4 819

-

Sudan

-

South Africa

Sierra Leone

Somalia

4 900

4 471

Senegal

Development

-

-

-

-

-

-

54

-2 667

-

-

-

-

-

-

11 603

43 975

136

-

-

-

-

-

-

30 133

-

-

37

-

4 376

73 017

23 054

87 741

-

32 766

8 816

389 290

-

18 147

13 788

6 785

Total

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

165

2 719

-

3 136

-

-

17 310

20 500

4 611

-

4 291

121 470

-2 803

20 911

8 690

9 462

15 205

3 138

50 821

130 676

8 695 1 381 743

-

2 418

-

-

-

-

817

-

-

-

-

-

Special Bilaterals
Oper.

2004

4 346

67 450

43 863

103 952

289

37 556

10 779

569 691

-

22 761

9 128

2 860

Relief

-

12 748

10 919

-

-

3 849

-

-

-

12 721

9 933

1 641

2 287

16 629

-

-

19 511

5 762

9 119

2 096

815

55 402

-66

103 392

266

-

7 159

-

18 247

92 260

145 704 1 762 296

409

-

8 147

6 791

-

6 092

-

4 400

480

-

4 127

3 361

Development

-

17 517

228

-

2 623

-

8

-0

29 008

-

-

-

-

-

1 779

130 188

106

-

-

-

-

-

-

110 879

-

-

75

-

4 861

67 998

52 010

110 744

289

43 649

10 774

684 970

480

22 761

13 330

6 221

Total

-

-

-

-

-

-

0

-

1 375

-

-

358

-

1 061

-

-

49 776

16 909

9 119

4 719

4 664

55 410

-67

133 775

12 986

9 933

9 158

2 287

35 938

94 040

4 688 2 042 876

0

548

-

-

-

-

-5

-

-

-

-

-

Special Bilaterals
Oper.

2005

6 621

98 870

53 634

98 696

465

33 199

8 136

465 543

-

53 465

5 753

2 703

Relief

-

14 497

15 215

-

-

3 092

-

-

-

14 990

181

1 943

1 694

42 113

-

4 551

45 346

9 599

9 527

366

1 305

9 964

-

63 145

-

-

11 238

-

4 125

81 938

130 139 1 517 868

66

-

6 501

4 557

-

5 409

-

3 191

893

-

4 275

3 464

Development

-

53 438

531

-

2 943

-

-

-

27 047

-

-

-

-

-

12 934

112 399

757

-

-

-

-

-

-

88 897

-

-

90

-

7 444

98 870

60 135

103 253

465

38 608

8 136

557 631

893

53 465

10 118

6 167

Total

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1 835

-

-

759

-

3 283

-

4 551

113 281

25 345

9 527

3 309

4 397

9 964

-

92 026

14 990

181

13 940

1 694

49 521

94 872

1 501 1 761 907

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Special Bilaterals
Oper.

2006

3 173

97 913

13 654

107 029

1 836

31 004

11 155

463 199

-

64 508

7 335

3 557

Relief

-

14 368

15 703

-

-

4 356

-

-

-

14 879

-

2 028

3 711

65 185

-

11 588

11 187

21 463

11 307

-

2 965

33 699

49

36 876

-

-

13 459

-

12 387

118 893

154 001 1 513 588

20

-

5 205

3 437

-

8 683

-

3 340

894

-

4 885

2 853

Development

-

4 171

152

-

-

-

-

-

5 171

-

-

-

-

-

14 821

134 782

123

-

-

2 440

59

-

-

98 693

-

3 169

123

-

3 302

97 938

18 859

113 140

1 896

39 719

11 155

588 886

894

67 678

12 350

6 418

Total

-

85

-

-

-

-

-

-

2 989

6 403

-

2 883

-

1 858

6

11 588

29 812

37 318

11 307

-

7 321

33 699

49

45 036

21 282

-

18 371

3 711

79 430

133 719

29 269 1 831 640

-14

25

-

234

-

33

-

23 653

-

-

7

8

Special Bilaterals,
Oper. Trust Funds
and Others3

2007

dollars)

12 436

-33

-

-

-

Tajikistan

Other Regional Expenditure

TOTAL REGION

44

3 865

Bolivia

-

1 349

Guyana

1 395

Guatemala

93

185

3 457

El Salvador

Ecuador

Dominican Republic

Cuba

15

-

Belize

Colombia

-

Barbados

-

-

-

2 679

644

-1

-3

181

6 712

398

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

40 411

201

12 515

-

-

-

Serbia and Montenegro**

-

Kyrgyzstan

4 720

3 940

3 455

3 176

326 263

Russian Federation

-

-

Georgia

Armenia

Azerbaijan

-

-

Albania

EASTERN EUROPE AND CIS

TOTAL REGION

76 226

-

73

Other Regional Expenditure

2 310

-

Timor-Leste

10

-

8 505

2 319

Thailand

Relief

Sri Lanka

Development

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

9 012

23

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

6 020

-

-

-

-

Special Bilaterals
Oper.

2004

-

4 028

2 039

92

182

3 638

6 727

4 262

-

-

40 411

-33

12 436

201

12 515

-

4 720

3 940

3 455

3 176

417 521

96

2 310

10

10 824

Total

-

2 164

705

-

19

5 750

-

3 632

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

71 047

43

-

-

278

Development

245

6 819

1 403

204

-0

1 840

11 041

646

-

-

35 874

-

13 234

-

8 019

4

4 622

5 548

2 345

2 103

379 069

9 893

1 331

400

53 482

Relief

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

63 343

5 138

-

-

7 041

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2 794

-

-

-

-

Special Bilaterals
Oper.

2005

245

8 983

2 107

204

19

7 590

11 041

4 279

-

-

35 874

-

13 234

-

8 019

4

4 622

5 548

2 345

2 103

516 254

15 074

1 331

400

60 801

Total

-

879

422

-

2

4 245

0

3 500

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

94 317

-

-

-

592

Development

-

14 169

1 871

1 146

-

862

12 544

1 452

-

166

32 044

-

13 709

-3

5 931

-

4 589

5 084

2 725

8

274 646

4 091

7 275

-

22 175

Relief

-

-

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

18

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

99 285

1 568

-

-

824

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

5 877

-

-

-

-

Special Bilaterals
Oper.

2006

-

15 048

2 293

1 146

2

5 106

12 544

4 952

-

184

32 044

-

13 709

-3

5 931

-

4 589

5 084

2 725

8

474 125

5 659

7 275

-

23 591

Total

-

2 423

1 226

-

-

2 036

-

3 325

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

121 606

-

-

-

1 376

Development

-

4 132

1 431

890

569

265

15 480

3 968

145

28

33 597

-

7 780

-

8 212

-

4 381

7 836

5 388

-

320 518

-

8 576

-

38 070

Relief

-

-

77

144

-

-

-

-

-

36

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

28 096

451

-

-

3 329

-

-

-

63 433

-

-

3 858

306

-

-

6

-

-

-

-

-

6

-

-

-

14 436

-

-

-

213

Special Bilaterals,
Oper. Trust Funds
and Others3

2007

-

6 555

2 734

64 467

569

2 301

19 338

7 599

145

64

33 603

-

7 780

-

8 212

-

4 387

7 836

5 388

-

484 657

451

8 576

-

42 988

Total

Annex 1 - cont.
DIRECT EXPENDITURES1 BY COUNTRY, REGION AND CATEGORY, 2004-2007 (thousand

30 212

26 208

-

30

-

45

3 102

7 021

70

Syrian Arab Republic

Yemen

7 022

1 350

73 114

-199

28 771

191

-1

4 735

-1 163

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

5 898

-

-

-

2 906

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2 906

143 654

856 973

-4 898

7 521

2 903

28 771

191

-

-

1 725

800 807

1 831

4 202

13 920

59 326

30

2 145

-

8 462

-

-

8 093

19 626

Total

-5 472

15 774

34

6 988

3 900

-

-0

-

-

402

-

-

4 452

-

31 831

345

3 207

-

6 828

-

-

1 530

7 651

Development

8 836

55 629

-

527

-

24 432

16

-

-

8

18 553

763

-

11 330

41 188

-

1 103

-

2 255

-

-

2 112

13 520

Relief

32

2 699

-

-

-

-

-

2 326

-

-

374

-

-

-

461

159

-

-

-

-

-

-

302

-17 472

10 013

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

10 013

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Special Bilaterals
Oper.

2005

139 801

84 116

34

7 514

3 900

24 432

16

2 326

-

409

28 940

763

4 452

11 330

73 480

504

4 309

-

9 082

-

-

3 643

21 473

Total

9 223

10 090

33

7 241

926

-

-

-

-

500

-

-

1 389

-

24 442

869

1 351

-

7 639

-

-

788

4 748

Development

30 261

61 150

78

649

110

36 625

-

-

6 930

-

5 851

384

112

10 411

46 339

-

0

281

2 777

-

-

1 134

9 938

Relief

7 666

15 783

-

-

-

-

-

1 265

14 519

-

-

-

-

-

1 202

608

-

575

-

-

-

-

-

76

4 310

-

-

-

-

-

-

2 890

-

1 420

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Special Bilaterals
Oper.

2006

233 601

91 333

111

7 891

1 036

36 625

-

1 265

24 339

500

7 271

384

1 501

10 411

71 984

1 478

1 352

856

10 416

-

-

1 922

14 687

Total

(**) As of June 2006, Serbia and Montenegro are separate countries.

(*) Including funds from the United Nations Security Council Resolution 986, “Oil-for-food” Agreement.

Negative figures represent financial adjustments.

3 Includes all Expenditures for Bilaterals, Trust Funds, General Fund & Special Accounts.

2 Operational Expenditures includes General Fund, Special Accounts and Trust Funds that cannot be apportioned by project/operation, which are cumulated under the column ‘Total’ (2004-2006).

17 166

762 490

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

762 490

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Special Bilaterals
Oper.

1 Excludes programme support and administrative costs.

OTHER 2

TOTAL REGION

16 633

500

-3 806

-

Palestinian Territory

Other Regional Expenditure

-

Morocco

-

-

-

-

Lybia

-514

32 419

1 831

-

13 920

Lebanon

2 238

-

Iraq *

Jordan

-

4 202

Iran

Egypt

Algeria

-

187

1 958

-

2 189

-

-

2 859

10 364

Relief

MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

TOTAL REGION

Other Regional Expenditure

Peru

Panama

6 274

-

Mexico

Nicaragua

-

Honduras

Jamaica

6 356

5 234

Haiti

Development

2004

-6 594

10 128

-

4 499

3 544

-

-

-

-

516

-

-

1 568

-

30 177

1 511

1 816

-

2 371

-

-

4 269

11 200

Development

-13 207

102 383

-

2 033

2 868

69 993

-

-

470

-

12 915

826

-

13 278

48 776

20

4 474

17

5 226

112

32

1 445

10 542

Relief

1 157

1 736

-

-

-

-

-

497

1 239

-

-

-

-

-

473

198

-

17

-

-

-

-

-

126 769

2 818

-

-

69

0

-

-

-0

-

59

-

2 684

6

98 793

-

13 934

-

-

-

-

17 262

-

Special Bilaterals,
Oper. Trust Funds
and Others3

2007

108 124

117 065

-

6 532

6 481

69 993

-

497

1 709

516

12 974

826

4 251

13 285

178 219

1 729

20 223

34

7 597

112

32

22 976

21 742

Total

dollars)

Annex 2
TOTAL CONFIRMED CONTRIBUTIONS IN 2007 (thousand dollars)

Donor

Total

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

1 000

ANDORRA

Development

Emergency

IRA

PRRO

40

47

61 629

13 069

14 561

14 795

3 794

1 015

144

2 636

AZERBAIJAN

2 397

BANGLADESH

10 655

BELGIUM

17 644

Others*

1 000

130

AUSTRIA

AUSTRALIA

SO

43
6 214

12 990

1 167

737

2 397
10 655
2 052

1 000

12 688

BHUTAN

5

5

BOLIVIA

232

232

BRAZIL

1 096

BULGARIA

10

CAMBODIA

503

CAMEROON

164

CANADA
CAPE VERDE
CHILE
CHINA

100

996
10
503
164

160 758

46 185

248

248

50

50

2 567

2 000

45 556

6 569

58 790

14

500

1 408

2 251

53

COLOMBIA

17

17

CROATIA

10

10

CUBA

975

CYPRUS

656

CZECH REP
DENMARK

6

561
44 339

ECUADOR

248

EGYPT

461

EL SALVADOR

160

ESTONIA

975
650

28 901

265

62

140

10 198

44

231

42
9 304

107 131

79

54

FINLAND

25 403

8 000

5 896

FRANCE

33 762

2 450

5 542

GERMANY

65 680

29 969

5 081

44

GREECE
GUATEMALA
HONDURAS
HUNGARY

113 770

14 744

105

10 491

267

645

596

20 132

683

4 359

7 789

1 475

24 613

1 814

19

2 452

6

6

65

65

1 887

1 603

179

8 856

4 497

1 395

14

7 450

ISRAEL

3 100
34 244
31
31 265

7 446

2 469

JAPAN

118 713

9 180

29 498

KENYA
KOREA REP. OF
LESOTHO, THE KINGDOM OF

4

100
2 897

0.2

3 000

1 808

19 550

3 533

1 889

9 984

2 419

8 947

100

64 653

13 091

1 891

400

30

93
2 454

68

1

ITALY

JORDAN

1 835

258

INDIA

IRELAND

5 488

752

258

ICELAND

INDONESIA

186
160

42

133

FAROE ISLANDS

1 808
248

250 437

EUROPEAN COMMISSION

234
3 292

93
1 410

1 044

20 850

800

950

19 950
950

46

100

Donor
LIECHTENSTEIN
LITHUANIA

Total

Development

43

3 425

1 497

1 496

MALAWI

1 846

MAURITANIA

800
148

830

102

4

NEW ZEALAND

4 963

2 190

1 084

PANAMA

5 336

46 682

40 209

13 340

1 450

1 450

300

50

1 562

4 850

17 246

23

490

1

755

200

546

PORTUGAL

111

6 537

SRI LANKA
SUDAN (GOVT OF SOUTH SUDAN)
SWAZILAND

2 022

442

50
29

15
101
384

6 610

2 532

17 536

2 952

31

31
55 379

460

SWITZERLAND

31 823

17 432

4 073

55 379

64 863

460

2 687

15 803

3 001

41 754

773

3 532

3 064

1 640

20 727

2 730

977

112

112

TUNISIA

100

100

TURKEY

3 050

900

U.K.

1 949

14 000

384
29 631

SWEDEN

THAILAND

10 822

50
44

SOUTH AFRICA

1 893

147
1 000

101

SPAIN

17 109

147

SLOVAKIA

9
111

15 000

SLOVENIA

1 526

3 255

POLAND

SINGAPORE

1 684

1

49 205

750

250

3 278

20

SAUDI ARABIA

3 225

24

40

ROMANIA

46

1 689

550

RUSSIAN FEDERATION

1

24

PERU

PRIVATE DONORS**

247

4
14 173

PAKISTAN

133

800

5 464

ORGANIZATION OF THE
ISLAMIC CONFERENCE

7 317

1 846

75 630

OPEC FUND

Others*

0.1

NETHERLANDS

NORWAY

SO

306

11 951

MOZAMBIQUE

PRRO

43

MADAGASCAR

NICARAGUA

IRA

306

LUXEMBOURG

NEPAL

Emergency

66 851

2 150

11 185

43 099

2 577

9 990

1 176 257

36 842

504 233

620 034

12 825

2 324

143 265

4 459

35 944

68 996

33 308

518

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

2 100

1 000

ZAMBIA, THE REPUBLIC OF

2 500

162 199

86 981

U.S.A.
UN CERF, COMMON FUNDS
AND AGENCIES

GRAND TOTAL

2 705 376

40

1 100
2 500

276 952

827 776

Bilateral Contributions

26 901

1 324 566

40 778

* Others: contributions to Trust Funds, Special Accounts, and General Fund.
** Private contributions do not include US$45.2 million of extraordinary gifts-in-kind such as advertising.

47

WFP Executive Board 2007

Member States

Australia

New Zealand

Austria

Niger

Canada

Norway

Cape Verde

Pakistan

China

Peru

Colombia

Philippines

Congo, Republic of the

Russian Federation

Cuba

Slovenia

Ethiopia

Sudan

Germany

Sweden

Haiti

Switzerland

India

Tunisia

Indonesia

Ukraine

Iran, Islamic Republic of

United Kingdom

Japan

United Republic of Tanzania

Kuwait

USA

Mexico

Zambia

Netherlands

Zimbabwe

Executive Board Bureau Members

Mr James Melanson
Canada (President)

H.E. José Eduardo Dantas Ferreira Barbosa
Cape Verde (Vice-President)

Mr Ramalingam Parasuram
India (Member)

H.E. Sabas Pretelt de la Vega
Colombia (Member)

Ms Bojana Hocevar
Slovenia (Member)

48

Table of Contents
2

4
5

7

8

Notes

PREFACE BY THE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR

Acronyms used:

2007 IN REVIEW
Extreme weather patterns and natural
disasters
Soaring food and fuel prices

WFP by numbers

10 FOCUS - THE BANGLADESH
CYCLONE
11 The cyclone strikes

CERF

Central Emergency Response Fund

LDC

least-developed country

CP

country programme

LIFDC

low-income food-deficit country

CRED

Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters

LRT

Logistics Response Team

DEV

development project

MDG

Millennium Development Goal

ECW

Enhanced Commitments to Women

NGO

non-governmental organisation

EMOP

emergency operation

P4P

Purchase for Progress

FAO

Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations

PRONAA

Programa Nacional de Asistencia Alimentaria
(Peru)

GTZ

Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit

PRRO

protracted relief and recovery operation

HEB

high-energy biscuit

SO

special operation

UNDP

United Nations Development Programme

UNESCO

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization

IDD

iodine deficiency disorder

IDP

internally displaced person

IFAD

International Fund for Agricultural Development

UNFPA

United Nations Population Fund

ILO

International Labour Organization

UNHCR

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees

UNICEF

United Nations Children’s Fund

UNIFEM

United Nations Development Fund for Women

UNJLC

United Nations Joint Logistics Centre

WHO

World Health Organization

IPCC

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

IRA

Immediate Response Account

JP

joint programme

LACERN

Latin America and Caribbean Emergency
Response Network

WFP’s immediate response

General notes:

Preparedness saved lives

One billion equals 1,000 million.
All quantities of food commodities are in metric tonnes, unless otherwise specified.

13 An emergency operation for the
worst affected

Direct expenditures include food, landside transport, storage and handling, direct support costs, external transport and other direct
support costs components, but exclude indirect support costs and Programme Support and Administrative budget costs.
In some tables, totals do not exactly add up because of rounding.

14 Looking ahead to the
second phase

18 Flooding in Mexico
Peru earthquake

16 EMERGENCIES: REACHING
THE HUNGRY
17 Hurricanes and floods in Latin
America and the Caribbean
Nicaragua battered by Hurricane
Felix
18 Tropical Storm Noel hits the
Dominican Republic

20 Weather-related challenges
in Africa

Low-income food-deficit countries (LIFDCs) include all food-deficit (net cereal-importing) countries with a per capita income below the
historical ceiling used by the World Bank to determine eligibility for International Development Association (IDA) assistance and for
20-year International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) terms; the designation LIFDC is applied to countries included
in World Bank categories I and II. The historical ceiling of per capita gross national product (GNP) for 2005, based on the World Bank Atlas
method, is US$1,675. In 2007, 82 countries were classified by FAO as LIFDCs.
The United Nations category of least-developed countries (LDCs) includes “those low-income countries (LICs) that are suffering from
long-term handicaps to growth, in particular low levels of human resource development and/or severe structural weaknesses”. In 2007,
50 countries were classified as LDCs by UN-OHRLLS, the United Nations Office of the High Representative for LDCs, Landlocked
Developing Countries (LLDCs) and Small Island Developing States (SIDS).

Photo credits

Uganda floods
21 Meeting the challenges of climate
change in the Sahel
22 POST
OST-EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS
OPERATIONS – THE
THE
IMPORTANCE
IMPORTANCE OF
OF SCHOOL
SCHOOL FEEDING
FEEDING

COVER: WFP/Shehzad Noorani; TABLE OF CONTENTS: Bangladesh WFP/GM Akash; Page 2: Nepal, WFP/James Giambrone; Page 3: Sudan, UNMIS/Tim McKulka;
Page 4: Burundi, WFP/Stephanie Savariaud; Page 6: Dominican Republic, WFP/Alejandro Lopez-Chicheri; Page 7: Dominican Republic, WFP/Alejandro LopezChicheri; Page 10: Bangladesh, WFP/GM Akash; Page 11: Bangladesh, WFP/GM Akash; Page 12: Bangladesh, WFP/GM Akash; Page 13: Bangladesh, WFP/
GM Akash; Page 14: Bangladesh, WFP/GM Akash; Page 15: Bangladesh, WFP/GM Akash; Page 16: Dominican Republic, WFP/Alejandro Lopez-Chicheri;
Page 17: Dominican Republic, WFP/Alejandro Lopez-Chicheri; Page 19: Peru, WFP/Anibal Solimano; Page 20: Uganda, WFP/Marcelo Spina; Page 21: Mauritania,
WFP/Marcus Prior; Page 22: Mauritania, WFP/Marcus Prior; Page 23: Mozambique, WFP/ Michael Huggins; Page 24: Mali, WFP/Marcus Prior; Page 24: Mali,
WFP/Marcus Prior; Page 25: Nepal, WFP/James Giambrone; Page 26: Ethiopia, Petterik Wiggers/PANOS Pictures; Page 28: Sudan, WFP/Diego Fernandez;
Page 29: Senegal, WFP/Stephanie Savariaud; Page 30: Kenya, WFP/Marcus Prior; Page 32: Somalia, WFP/Kim Fredriksson; Page 34: Kenya, WFP/Marcus Prior;
Page34: Algeria, AFP/Fayez Nureldine; Page 35: Sudan, WFP/Simon Crittle; Page 36: Nepal, WFP/James Giambrone; Page 38: Mozambique, SRS/Mirco Pecci;
Page 39: Mozambique, SRS/Mirco Pecci; Page 40: Bangladesh, WFP/GM Akash.

ISSN 1020-1753 P0806/E15,500/5.08 - Printed by Stilgrafica srl - Roma

World Food
Programme
2007

Division of Communications
and Public Policy Strategy

Via Cesare Giulio Viola, 68/70 - 00148 Rome, Italy
Tel.: +39-066513-2628 • Fax: +39-066513-2840
E-mail: wfpinfo@wfp.org

wfp.org

World Food Programme - Annual Report 2007

World Food Programme

Be part of the solution

