ISSN 1020-1753 P0902/E15,000/5.09 - Printed by Quintily S.p.A.

World Food Programme

Via Cesare Giulio Viola, 68/70 - 00148 Rome, Italy
Tel.: +39-066513-2628 • Fax: +39-066513-2840
E-mail: wfpinfo@wfp.org

wfp.org

World Food Programme - Annual Report 2009

Division of Communications, Public Policy
and Private Partnerships

World Food
Programme
2009

Table of Contents

Notes

Acronyms used

CAP

Consolidated Appeals Process

ISC

indirect support costs

CERF

Central Emergency Response Fund

LDC

least-developed country

CFSA

crop and food supply assessment

LIFDC

low-income food-deficit country

CP

country programme

MERET

Managing Environmental Resources Better to Enable
Transitions to Sustainable Livelihoods

DEV

development project
NGO

non-governmental organisation

DSC

direct support costs

P4P

Purchase for Progress

EMOP

emergency operation

PRRO

protracted relief and recovery operation

ER

Enhancing Resilience

SO

special operation

FAO

Food and Agriculture Organization

UNHAS

United Nations Humanitarian Air Service

UNHCR

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees

of the United Nations
ICT

information and communication technology

IDP

internally displaced person

UNICEF

United Nations Children’s Fund

IRA

Immediate Response Account

VAM

vulnerability analysis and mapping

General notes
• All monetary values are in United States dollars, unless otherwise stated.
• One billion equals 1,000 million.
• All quantities of food are in metric tons (mt) unless otherwise specified.
• Direct expenditures include food, external transport, LTSH, DSC and ODOC components, but exclude ISC.
• In some tables, totals are rounded and so may not add up exactly.
• LIFDCs include all food-deficit (net cereal-importing) countries with a per capita income below the historical ceiling used by the World Bank to determine
eligibility for International Development Association (IDA) assistance and for 20-year International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) terms;
the designation LIFDC is applied to countries included in the World Bank categories I and II. The historical ceiling of per capita gross national product (GNP)
for 2005, based on the World Bank Atlas method, is $1,675. In 2007, 82 countries were classified by FAO as LIFDCs.
• Three criteria are used to identify LDCs, as proposed by the United Nations Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked
Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States (UN-OHRLLS) Committee for Development Policy: i) low-income based on a three-year estimate of
gross national income (GNI): per capita under $750 for inclusion, above $900 for graduation; ii) human resource weakness involving a composite human assets
index (HAI) of nutrition, health, education and adult literacy; and iii) economic vulnerability, involving a composite economic vulnerability index of
agricultural production, exports of goods and services, manufacture share in GDP, merchandise export concentration, handicap of economic smallness and
percentage of population displaced by natural disasters.

Photo credits
COVER: Courtesy of Howard G. Buffett; TABLE OF CONTENTS: Myanmar, WFP/Eddie Gerald; Page 2: Myanmar, Photo: WFP/Naho Asai; Page 4: Sudan, WFP/Fred
Noy; Page 5: Myanmar, WFP/Edith Champagne; Page 6: Myanmar, WFP/KyawZaw Tun; Page 7: (a) Haiti, UN/MINUSTAH/Logan Abassi; (b) Georgia,
ECHO/Daniela Cavini; Page 10: Myanmar, WFP/Photolibrary; Page 11: Myanmar, WFP/Edith Champagne; Page 12: (a) Myanmar, WFP/KyawZaw Tun; (b)
Myanmar, WFP/Eddie Gerald; Page 13: Myanmar, WFP/Eddie Gerald; Page 14: Myanmar, WFP/Eddie Gerald; Page 16: (a) Haiti, WFP/Darlyne Jeanty; (b) Haiti,
WFP/Vincenzo Sparapani; Page 18: DRC, WHO/Christopher Black; Page 19: DRC, WHO/Christopher Black; Page 20: Georgia, Bruno Stevens/Cosmos; Page
21: Georgia, Uwe Schober/ Rupert Beagle Photography; Page 22: Somalia, WFP/Peter Smerdon; Page 24: Kenya, WFP/Marcus Prior; Page 25: Kenya,
WFP/Marcus Prior; Page 26: Afghanistan, WFP/Marcelo Spina; Page 27: Afghanistan, UNHCR/Roger Arnold; Page 28: Sudan, WFP/Carla Lacerda; Page 29:
Lesotho, WFP/Stephen Wong; Page 30: Ethiopia, WFP/Natasha Scripture; Page 31: Ethiopia, Photo: WFP/Barry Came; Page 33: (a) Bangladesh, Photo
courtesy of Brent Stirton/Getty Images; (b) Bangladesh, Photo courtesy of Brent Stirton/Getty Images; Page 34: Sudan, WFP/Mikael Bjerrum; Page 35:
Thailand, Reuters/Sukree Sukplang; Page 36: Bangladesh, Photo courtesy of Brent Stirton/Getty Images; Page 37: Sudan, WFP/Carla Lacerda; Page 38:
Liberia, UNMIL/Christopher Herwig; Page 39: Zimbabwe, WFP/Richard Lee; Page 40: DRC, WFP/Marcus Prior; Page 41: Bangladesh, Photo courtesy of
Brent Stirton/Getty Images; Page 42: Uganda, WFP/Marco Frattini; Page 43: Uganda, WFP/Marco Frattini; Page 44: Somalia, Franco Pagetti/ VII.

2

PREFACE BY THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR

26 NUTRITION
27 Rising Prices in Afghanistan's Hungry Cities

4

2008 IN REVIEW

28 Beating North Darfur’s Hunger Gap

8

WFP by Numbers

29 Keeping Children in School in Lesotho

10 SAVING LIVES

30 COUNTERING CLIMATE CHANGE

11 Cyclone Nargis Batters Myanmar

31 Preserving Soil in Ethiopia

16 Haiti Reels Under Four Storms

32 Lifting Houses in Bangladesh

19 Refugees Flee DRC
20 Conflict Erupts in Georgia

34 FOOD FLIGHTS
35 Transporting Relief

22 SECURITY
23 Piracy Endangers Somali Waters

36 FUNDING AND RESOURCES

23 Post-Election Violence Surfaces in Kenya
40 PARTNERSHIPS
41 Private Sector Partners
44 ANNEXES

The World Food Programme’s 2009 Annual Report uses data, photos and stories from the prior year
to chronicle WFP’s operations during calendar year 2008.

Children in a flooded, rural area near Myanmar's capital, Yangon
Cover: A WFP beneficiary of a school feeding programme in Sheder Primary School in Eastern Ethiopia,
near the Somali border

Preface by the Executive Director
was one of the most challenging —
yet most rewarding — in WFP’s history.
Faced with the triple threat of the food, fuel and
financial crises, this extraordinary organization showed
once again that nothing gets between WFP and a
hungry child. And, with the new Strategic Plan (20082011), we were able to design smarter and more
targeted responses than ever before.

2008

In addition to the ongoing complex emergencies we
handled in countries such as Afghanistan, Somalia and
Sudan (Darfur), we witnessed shocks from the financial
and commodities markets, extreme climate events and
political turmoil, which had a severe impact on the
poorest and most vulnerable people. All these factors,
combined with diminished purchasing power, reduced
remittances and tightened access to credit, resulted in
an additional 115 million people added to the ranks
of the hungry over the past two years.

Josette Sheeran in Yangon, where WFP
implemented a cash transfer programme
as part of its response to Cyclone Nargis

was extended over the summer holiday to as many
as 200,000 children and “take-home rations” were
supplied to the families of 1.1 million children. WFP
launched targeted cash and voucher programmes for
populations who are unable to afford food, with the
first such programme in Africa launched in February
2009 in Burkina Faso. In response to high food prices,
safety net programmes were deployed in Djibouti,
Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Mauritania, Mozambique,
Pakistan, Senegal, Tajikistan and Yemen.

But not only did we keep the cup full for many millions
dependent on food assistance, we succeeded in
scaling up for the global emergency of vulnerable
populations hit by soaring food and fuel prices. Thanks
to the generosity of our donors, to the innovative work
of nations and to our dedicated global staff — both on
the front lines of hunger and in headquarters working
around the clock to find solutions for a historic hunger
emergency — WFP helped prevent a worldwide crisis
from turning into a full-scale human tragedy. With food
riots erupting in more than 30 nations in the first half
of 2008, WFP’s assistance helped bring stability to
a volatile environment.

Throughout the crisis, WFP moved to help break the
cycle of hunger at its root by spending $1.1 billion
purchasing food in developing countries, nearly double
the spending of the previous year. Our Purchase for
Progress (P4P) initiative, designed to ensure WFP
procurement benefits small-scale farmers, is rolling out
in 21 countries through the generous advocacy and
support of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and the
Howard G. Buffett Foundation and donors such as
Belgium, Canada and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Drawing on global best practices, last year we
deployed innovative, targeted food safety-net
programmes in our Strategic Plan toolbox, like motherand-child health and nutrition initiatives; targeted cash
transfers and food vouchers; local food purchase; and
school feeding. In Haiti, for example, where soaring
food prices unleashed a nutrition crisis, school feeding

2

Clearly, we were able to deploy a new and more robust
toolbox of hunger solutions, informed by the root
causes of hunger and shaped by the market conditions
on the ground and needs of the population. The
Strategic Plan (2008–2011) approved by the Executive
Board in June 2008 lays the groundwork for this
sustained effort. The aim of the Strategic Plan is to
support nations in meeting emergency needs and in
identifying longer-term solutions to the hunger
challenge. We were able to draw on the five Strategic
Objectives of the Plan, framed around WFP’s mission
and mandate, to reposition WFP from a food aid
agency to a food assistance agency.

WFP continued to lead the global Logistics Cluster
both operationally and strategically. We saw nine WFPled logistics cluster operations in 2008; in the largest,
the response to Cyclone Nargis in Myanmar, a
humanitarian air bridge from Bangkok to Yangon
delivered 5,000 metric tons of relief goods to
flood-affected victims. Globally, the WFP-managed
United Nations Humanitarian Air Service transported
361,000 humanitarian aid workers into conflict and
disaster zones. WFP is grateful to nations supplying
naval escorts to ensure that life-saving food assistance
is delivered through dangerous waters off the coast of
Somalia, reaching 2.8 million beneficiaries.

WFP’s operational innovations were matched by internal
reforms such as the appointment of a full-time Ethics
Officer, the first in any United Nations agency, and the
creation of an office of accountability and results-based
management. Preparation to launch the International
Public Sector Accounting Standards and the upcoming
introduction of WINGS II continue to place WFP in the
vanguard of UN best practices and reforms.

The foundation of WFP is our dedicated workforce of
almost 12,000 people stationed around the world. WFP
holds security paramount but we are nonetheless hit
by increasing dangers and tragedy. Four WFP staff
members were killed in 2008. Thirteen WFP-contracted
staff and two staff of our implementing partners also
died while providing services for WFP. Clearly, there are
escalating risks involved for those who work to ensure
that life-saving assistance reaches the world’s most
vulnerable — and we are making it our highest priority
to minimize those risks.

Despite an unprecedented funding gap in early 2008
due to increased global hunger demands in the face
of rising fuel and food costs, more than 85 percent of
identified needs was met. Thanks to generous and
timely contributions from our donors, total
contributions in 2008 reached $5.1 billion, which
enabled WFP to assist more than 102 million
beneficiaries in 78 countries. The UN Secretary General
launched the High Level Task Force on the food crisis,
helping ensure a global, coherent response.

We began 2009 with even greater challenges, but with
the confidence that ending hunger is possible. We will
continue to adapt and transform the way we work to
meet the immediate needs of the hungry today — as
efficiently and effectively as possible — and to be a
leader in crafting with governments and partners
coherent, long-term hunger solutions for tomorrow.

Vulnerability analysis and mapping (VAM), one of WFP’s
core strengths, maximized the impact of the
international response to the food crisis and to natural
disasters by identifying emerging vulnerable
populations in addition to existing food-insecure
regions. The number of VAM assessments increased
by 80 percent.

Josette Sheeran
Executive Director

3

2008, WFP faced a particularly difficult set of
challenges, provoked by dramatically rising food
and fuel prices and aggravated by widespread turmoil
in international financial systems. Steady progress
towards reducing global hunger not only ground to
a halt but began to slide in the opposite direction. The
number of undernourished people in the world
increased in 2008 to 963 million, a leap of 115 million
over the past two years.

In

To meet the immediate challenge, WFP launched the
new Emergency Market Mitigation Account in March
with a special appeal for $755 million to cover the
additional costs generated by higher commodity and
fuel prices.

2008 in Review
Donors responded promptly and generously. New
contributions surpassed the original target by May
and eventually totalled $1.032 billion, including a
$500 million contribution from Saudi Arabia. By year’s
end, donors had contributed more than $5 billion, a
record sum that enabled WFP to deliver an
unprecedented amount of food — almost four million
metric tons — to more than 102 million people in
78 countries.
While tackling the short-term challenge, WFP
continued searching for longer term solutions. One
historic shift in WFP’s overall approach was
repositioning the organization from a food aid to a food
assistance agency. A new Strategic Plan for 2008-2011
was launched in June that deepened and broadened
our analysis of the root causes of hunger and
introduced a variety of tools to address those causes.

In Sudan, after a flood destroyed her mud
home, killed 60 of her cattle and covered her
crops in water, Teresa Nyagag and her six
children were forced to eat dried river weeds
until WFP reached her.

4

Under the new Strategic Plan, we continue to
develop innovative ways to deliver needed food
assistance — cash and voucher programmes, new
nutritious food products to prevent and treat
malnutrition, P4P to open new markets for smallscale farmers and encourage them to increase
production.
For example, the first cash and voucher programme
in Africa was designed for Burkina Faso. By the end of
the year, WFP had cash or voucher transfer activities
in 24 countries. The first P4P proposal was approved
for Mozambique, and then quickly expanded to a
total of 21 countries in 2008. New guidelines were
prepared to strengthen WFP’s assessment procedures
in urban and peri-urban areas.
WFP’s core business remained emergencies, particularly
those involving extreme weather events and natural
disasters related to climate change. WFP launched
22 separate relief operations for victims of droughts,
floods, earthquakes and various types of windstorms
— cyclones, hurricanes and typhoons.

WFP distributes food in Htan Paing Village,
Myanmar.

Few were as complex as the emergency response
mounted after Cyclone Nargis struck Myanmar in
May. WFP provided $154 million of relief assistance
for some 1.2 million cyclone victims. The effort
involved deploying flotillas of river craft and a fleet of

5

2008 in Review
In Myanmar, urgent food supplies are transported to Bogale
in the aftermath of Cyclone Nargis.

Georgians required WFP assistance as a result of the
brief conflict that engulfed their region of the
Caucasus in August. In Zimbabwe, WFP had
provided help to around four million people as
2008 drew to a close. And the ongoing conflict in
Sudan required WFP’s sustained assistance for
six million people.

helicopters and fixed wing aircraft. Some 230 cargo
flights carrying relief goods used a humanitarian
air bridge that was established between Bangkok
and Yangon.
Elsewhere, WFP provided assistance to nearly
15 million hungry people in five countries in the
Horn of Africa — close to 12 million in Ethiopia alone
— after the region was ravaged by a lethal
combination of prolonged drought and dramatic
increases in the price of food and fuel. More than
800,000 people were reached in Haiti after three
hurricanes and a tropical storm swept across the
island nation in August and September. Some
20,000 people were assisted in eastern Yemen when
tropical storms deluged the country in October,
provoking flash floods 18 metres deep that washed
away thousands of homes.

Private sector partnerships were strengthened and
are expected to increase in importance. By 2017,
WFP envisions $200 million coming from the private
sector through expanded partnerships and
intensified fundraising efforts.
In 2008, WFP used private sector partners as “force
multipliers” to increase the effectiveness of WFP
Emergency Operations without adding
administrative burdens. Main partners included
Caterpillar, Citigroup, Google, Pepsi and TNT. In
addition, Emergency Operations in China, Haiti, India,
Mozambique and Myanmar were supported by the
logistics emergency team(s), composed of Agility,
TNT and UPS.

Man-made disasters demanded WFP’s attention as
well. We assisted close to 200,000 refugees fleeing
renewed fighting in the eastern regions of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Nearly 250,000

6

Making sure aid can get through: WFP
staff negotiated access at a Russian
army checkpoint in Georgia.

plans to review and, where necessary, reinforce
safety and security measures. At WFP headquarters
in Rome and at the agency’s field offices around the
world, programmes were implemented to ensure
that all facilities and operations remained compliant
with the UN’s Minimum Operating Security
Standards. Sessions to raise staff awareness about
potential threats were expanded, including
country-specific training on local dangers, such as
hostage mitigation, sniper avoidance and evasive
driving to escape car hijackings.

A Haitian child takes shelter from a rain
shower under a poncho during WFP’s
distribution of emergency rations in
the midst of hurricane Ike in Gonaives.

Unfortunately, 2008 was also marked by a rise in the
deliberate targeting of humanitarian and UN staff.
Four WFP staff were killed and 17 injured as a result
of malicious acts. Our contractors and partners also
paid a high price: seven drivers of WFP-contracted
trucks were shot and killed in banditry attacks in
Sudan, five were killed in similar attacks in Somalia
and one in the Philippines. Attacks on WFPcontracted trucks were also registered in Afghanistan,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mindanao
(Philippines) and Pakistan.

In high-risk countries, staff participated in Secure and
Safe Capacity in Field Environments training.
Discussions also began about expanding the weeklong Security Awareness Induction Training (required
for UN staff in Iraq) to other countries.

To meet the rising threat, WFP strengthened its
security for both staff and operations around the
world. At UN headquarters in New York, the HighLevel Committee on Management, chaired by WFP
Executive Director Josette Sheeran, ramped up

In the pirate-infested waters off the Somali coast,
naval escorts provided by a number of governments
proved an effective deterrent, and helped ensure that
vital WFP supplies could be delivered to those
in need.

7

WFP by Numbers
2007

2008

KEY FIGURES

MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOAL 1 Eradicate Extreme Poverty and Hunger
BENEFICIARIES
86.1

102.1

million hungry people in 78 countries (80 countries in 2007)

23.8

17.6

million in development projects and county programmes (DEVs/CPs)

15.3

25.0

million in emergency operations (EMOPs)

(8.1

9.3)

-

million in conflict situations

(7.2

15.7)

-

million in natural disasters

47.0

59.4

million in protracted relief and recovery operations (PRROs)

71.0

83.9

million women and children

1.9

1.9

million refugees

8.8

9.5

million internally displaced people (IDPs)

0.8

0.9

million returnees

ACTIVE PROJECTS
IN 2008

QUANTITY OF FOOD AID
3.3

3.9

million mt of food distributed

2.1

2.8

million mt of food procured by WFP

CPs
DEVs
EMOPs
PRROs
SOs
TOTAL

31
22
48
69
44
214

PROJECTS APPROVED IN 20081
6

3

CPs valued at $155 million

10

3

DEVs valued at $29 million

32

32

EMOPs/Immediate Response Account (IRA) valued at $2,133 million

31

15

PRROs valued at $1,625 million

14

23

special operations (SOs) valued at $261 million

REVENUE AND EXPENSES ($ billion)
2.705

5.042

in contributions received

N.A

5.115

in revenue

2.753

3.536

in direct expenses

N.A

3.725

in total expenses

88.5

87.7

DEVELOPING COUNTRIES AND WFP ASSISTANCE
percent of allocated development multilateral resources meeting country
concentration criteria

74.0

66.0

percent of allocated development resources reached LDCs

79.4

75.6

percent of food procured, by tonnage, in developing countries

72.0

68.0

percent of WFP assistance invested in sub-Saharan African countries
1

ISC are not included.

8

2007

2008

KEY FIGURES

MDG 2 Achieve Universal Primary Education
19.3
46.6
6.0

20.5
49.3
8.7

93.0

93.0

million schoolchildren received school meals/take-home rations2
percent were girls
percent annual rate of change in absolute enrolment for children in schools
with WFP school feeding programmes
percent of school days children attended in the year with school feeding
programmes

MDG 3 Promote Gender Equality and Empower Women
52.2
51.9
240 000 266 126
5.1
6.7
4.2

5.1

percent of beneficiaries were women or girls
women were in leadership positions on food management committees
million women received household food rations at distribution points in general
food distributions
million household food entitlements were issued in women’s names for general
food distributions

MDG 4 Reduce Child Mortality
53.6
5.7

62.2
6.3

million children were assisted in WFP operations
million malnourished children received special nutritional support

MDG 5 Improve Maternal Health
2.0

2.8

million vulnerable women received additional nutritional support

MDG 6 Combat HIV and AIDS, Malaria and Other Diseases
20
1.8
50

19
2.4
47

of the 25 highest HIV and AIDS prevalence countries received WFP assistance
million people affected by HIV and AIDS received WFP food assistance
countries received assistance for TB and HIV and AIDS prevention activities

MDG 7 Ensure Environmental Sustainability
17.1

21.3

million people received WFP food as an incentive to build assets, attend training,
build resilience to shocks and preserve livelihoods

MDG 8 Develop a Global Partnership For Development
15
12
8
84

15
10
14
150

2 815

2 838

stand-by partners
FAO/WFP crop and food supply assessments (CFSAs) conducted
UNHCR/WFP joint assessment missions conducted
corporate and private entities donating cash and in-kind gifts,
worth $194 million in 2008
NGOs worked with WFP
2

In addition, 1.98 million schoolchildren benefitting from WFP-managed trusts funds in El Salvador (888,000) and Honduras (1.1 million).

9

Saving Lives

Local residents unload WFP food
supplies from a tractor in
Yangon, Myanmar.

10

CYCLONE NARGIS BATTERS MYANMAR

Under the SO, WFP moved to ensure an uninterrupted
supply chain of relief supplies to affected areas by
setting up common logistics and telecommunications
services. Activities included establishing an air hub in
Bangkok; providing an airbridge between Bangkok and
Yangon: marshalling air, land and water transport
within the Ayeyarwady Delta; managing five logistics
hubs with storage facilities; and providing interagency
telecommunications infrastructure and services.

More than 130,000 people perished when Cyclone
Nargis swept out of the Indian Ocean to strike
Myanmar on 2 and 3 May. The storm, generating
200 km-per-hour winds and a huge tidal surge, washed
away hundreds of villages and inundated arable
farmland with salt-laden seawater.
In addition to the deaths, another 2.4 million people
were severely affected as the cyclone shattered local
infrastructure and destroyed food stores, seeds and
livestock. Overnight, the livelihoods of close to one
million people vanished. Most were left destitute,
unable to meet even their most basic food
requirements.

More than 230 air cargo flights carried 5,000 tons of
relief materials into Yangon via the airbridge from
Bangkok, while 10,400 tons of supplies were delivered
deep into the Delta by road and waterway. Some
30,000 square metres of storage space was created.
In the early stages of the relief operation, WFP
deployed 10 helicopters to ferry goods and passengers
to areas badly hit by the storm. As land and water

The Ayeyarwady Delta, Myanmar’s rice bowl and a rich
fishing ground, bore the brunt of the storm. Crop losses
in the Delta, combined with the destruction of fishing
gear and boats, farm tools and machinery, crippled
almost all income-generating opportunities in the
region. Conditions for the area’s poor, dependent on
wage labour for survival, deteriorated even further.
Only days after the disaster, WFP mounted a
multipronged response, launching two Emergency
Operations (EMOPs) and a separate Special Operation
(SO) to provide life-saving food and nutrition
assistance. A 30-day EMOP valued at $500,000 was
mobilized on 6 May, followed six days later by a longer
term $115 million EMOP and a $39 million SO.

Donated by USAID, a
water purification unit
is delivered to the
village of Set San,
where Cyclone Nargis
killed 1,300 people and
damaged or destroyed
3,000 houses.

The two EMOPs combined to deliver more than
63,000 metric tons of assistance to some
1.2 million hungry people, largely meeting the dual
short-term objectives of saving and sustaining the lives
of the cyclone’s victims while undertaking longer term
recovery and rehabilitation activities to restore
livelihoods and local infrastructure.

11

Saving Lives
transport improved during the emergency, the
helicopter fleet was gradually reduced. The service
proved invaluable — flying almost 1,900 hours while
carrying 22,000 passengers and more than 1,000 tons
of light cargo for 41 UN and government agencies, as
well as local and international NGOs.
That WFP was able to mount such a quick response
was largely due to the strength of the organization’s
national staff in Myanmar, particularly in the immediate
aftermath, when the government imposed travel
restrictions and introduced delays in granting visas to
foreign aid workers.
WFP’s local staff stepped up to the challenge. In the
first 30 days of the relief operation they delivered
almost 500 tons of emergency rations to more than
24,000 displaced people in temporary shelters,
including monasteries and public buildings. The rations
were often shared amongst people in the shelters as
the numbers of those seeking refuge steadily climbed
each day.
For people who needed immediate assistance but
possessed no cooking utensils, WFP provided 17 tons
of high energy biscuits. More than 49,000 beneficiaries
also received cash assistance for several weeks in
Yangon, where markets were still functioning, until the
government suspended this element of the operation
in June.

WFP provided urgent food assistance to 750,000 of the
1.5 million people severely affected by the cyclone with a
complete food basket for a period of six months.

12

A Buddhist temple destroyed in Zoung,
a village on the outskirts of Yangon

hen Aung Naing, 14, and his 11-year-old
brother, Kyaw, were swept away by
Cyclone Nargis’ tidal surge, neither could have
known they would be the only members of their
family to survive.

W

A WFP assessment team met the brothers when
they returned to their village in search of their
missing family. Neither boy had eaten for
36 hours, so WFP’s team shared their lunch
boxes and gave each brother a five-day ration of
high energy biscuits.
A regular one-month ration of rice, pulses,
vegetable oil and salt was also distributed in
their village, which had been totally destroyed.
Out of a total population of 322, only 32
survived and they were left with a single day’s
supply of food, no shelter and no drinking water.
Aung and Kyaw wondered how they would get
through the months ahead, unsure who would
care for them or whether they would return to
school.
In their shattered lives, only one certainty
remained — that they would not go hungry. For
a minimum of six months, WFP food supplies
would allow the two brothers to channel their
energies into addressing other needs, like
returning to school.
Villagers receive plastic sheets, water containers and rice
during WFP’s food distribution near Yangon.

13

14

A woman and her baby take refuge
in a Buddhist monastery in Khunk
Than village after the cyclone.

15

Saving Lives
HAITI REELS UNDER FOUR STORMS
In late August and early September, three successive
hurricanes and one tropical storm pummelled Haiti,
leaving a trail of devastation in their wake. The storms
wrought havoc throughout the island nation, isolating
vast areas of the country and striking particularly hard
in and around the town of Gonaives.
Flooding submerged Gonaives, home to 327,000 people,
in a sea of foul water and mud. Water levels rose to two
metres in parts of the town and afterwards left the area
blanketed in mud 40 cm deep. Almost 500 people died
in Gonaives. Some 50,000 families — 250,000 individuals
— were directly affected, with 5,500 homes destroyed
and more than 22,000 damaged.
In the country as a whole, the combined impact of the
four storms overwhelmed 800,000 people, leaving
them dependent on food and nutrition assistance for
survival. More than 100,000 homes were destroyed and
30 percent of the agricultural harvest wiped out,
including most of the corn, bean and banana crops.
Markets ceased to function.

WFP was able to swiftly implement a series of relief
operations thanks to close collaboration with the
government and partners. Donor support was key
as generous financial contributions and air and sea
assets made the lifeline possible. Clusters were
activated, rapid joint assessments were launched
and WFP doubled its staff in a matter of weeks.
High energy biscuits were distributed, followed by
general and targeted distributions of food rations,
where cooking facilities existed. SOs were also
launched to increase logistical capacity — as
inaccessible roads necessitated air and sea transport,
and storage facilities were insufficient. WFP opened
new sub-offices in Gonaives and Jacmel to meet
these needs.

For an impoverished nation, where three-quarters of
the population exists on less than two dollars a day, the
crisis exacerbated an already precarious food security
situation. Among the casualties were some 30 children
in Baie d’Orange in the southeast of the island, all of
whom died from acute undernutrition.

Under a $31 million EMOP, WFP managed to reach
800,000 people whose livelihoods had been lost. WFP
held general food distributions, expanded school
feeding and supplementary feeding programmes,

Families in Leogane in southern
Haiti were especially affected.

16

he first WFP-chartered helicopter sent to
Baie d’Orange, an isolated community in the
mountains of southeastern Haiti, might well
have turned back had it not been for the nature
of the mission.

T

Low cloud cover and the rugged terrain made a
landing difficult but the pilots persisted, primarily
because they were responding to an urgent call for
help from two NGOs — Terre des Hommes and
Oxfam UK — that had discovered pockets of severe
malnutrition that were ravaging Baie d’Orange’s
children.

WFP’s convoy of light vehicles arrives in Gonaives,
a city severely hit by the hurricanes.

Ten children under five years old died within two
weeks from severe malnutrition and diarrhoea, all
victims of the three hurricanes and tropical storm that
battered an already impoverished, isolated part of
Haiti where access to medical facilities was nonexistent.
When WFP’s helicopter landed in Baie d’Orange on
31 October, it was carrying emergency food
assistance, high energy biscuits and medical supplies.
Confronted with the situation on the ground, the
aircraft immediately evacuated eight severely
malnourished children with medical complications,
transporting them to hospital in Port-au-Prince.

and sponsored several post-disaster food-for-work
activities to rebuild critical infrastructure.
The two SOs were launched to support logistical
requirements, like communications, to get food and
nutrition assistance quickly to Haiti’s remote areas
by air, sea and land. WFP led the UN Logistics Cluster
and made its logistics available to the entire
humanitarian community — which multiplied many
times the work that WFP was carrying out for the
people of Haiti.

In subsequent weeks, WFP helicopters and six-wheel
drive trucks brought Baie d’Orange 40 metric tons of
food and nutritional assistance and 1,000 kg of high
energy biscuits. Close to 40 children were evacuated,
either by air or road on WFP-chartered transport. WFP
also donated small prefabricated buildings to help
establish a health clinic and storage facilities in the
community.

US and Canadian militaries worked with WFP to
transport assistance to beneficiaries in the first phase
of the relief interventions before WFP-contracted
helicopters, vessels and additional trucks were
available. WFP worked closely with the Argentine
battalion of the UN Mission for Stabilization in Haiti in
Gonaives, for example, greatly facilitating general food
distributions in the city.

An assessment mission visited Baie d’Orange in
December to identify areas where nutritional followup to malnourished children was needed and
possibly to implement further maternal health and
nutrition-related activities in the region.

17

With support from WFP, UNICEF
and Caritas, the Matumaini
Nutritional Treatment Centre
provides nourishment to
malnourished children in
Rutshuru, DRC.

18

REFUGEES IN FLIGHT IN DRC

feed 12,000 people for two weeks. Within days, nearly
100,000 displaced people and host families in both
Rutshuru and nearby Kiwanja had been registered and
received rations. The success of the operation, and in
particular the safe passage for truck convoys carrying
WFP food, helped open up other areas to humanitarian
assistance that had previously been cut off by fighting.

The residents of the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo were on the move again in late August, fleeing
their homes in terror as they have done too many times
over the last decade. This time, they were caught in the
fighting between government forces and Laurent
Nkunda’s rebel CNDP that escalated in August. With
soldiers shooting and looting on all sides, the region’s
main city Goma descended into chaos. Many
humanitarian organizations evacuated their staff. WFP’s
staff stayed put, and locked itself down for several
nights in its compound.

Food for WFP’s operation in North Kivu streamed into
Goma from various sources. Large stocks were borrowed
from neighbouring Rwanda; trucks motored in from
Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda, and a barge ferried
supplies from southern Africa via WFP’s Congolese
offices in Bukavu and Uvira.

As soon as the situation allowed, WFP staff moved out
and began urgent distributions to the tens of thousands
around the city, as many as 60,000 of them squeezed
into a stretch of land only a kilometre or so behind the
main front line of fighting.

By the end of 2008, eastern DRC had settled back into a
cycle of conflict, underdevelopment and marginalization.
The media had left, but the situation had changed little
with hundreds of thousands continuing to live in
horrendous conditions.

Operating in dangerous situations to assist those in need
is second nature to many WFP staff. On one occasion a
food distribution was brought to a sudden halt by
sustained gun and mortar fire from the surrounding hills.
Within minutes, the site emptied, leaving young children
lost and tearful as thousands streamed down into Goma.

Residents of Mugunga camp, near Goma in Eastern DRC,
benefit from distribution of food by WFP.

WFP’s most immediate challenge was to get rations to
more than 140,000 displaced people in six camps
around Goma. The blockade set up by CNDP forces was
squeezing food supplies, forcing prices up and turning
local sentiment against the refugees. Having delivered
these much needed rations, attention turned to those
beyond the front line, particularly the 60,000 inhabitants
of camps around Rutshuru town, which had been razed.
Intense fighting in the area had traumatized local
residents, disrupted markets, forced closure of schools
and restricted freedom of movement.
The first WFP truck convoy into Rutshuru crossed the
front line on 14 November, carrying enough food to

19

Saving Lives
CONFLICT ERUPTS IN GEORGIA

checkpoints in other parts of Georgia within a week.
A 200-strong EU observer force was deployed in
Georgia on 1 October.

On 8 August, conflict erupted in South Ossetia
(Georgia), involving Georgian, South Ossetian and
Russian forces. The Georgians withdrew from the
region and the Russians advanced into Georgia. Tens
of thousands of civilians fled the fighting. An estimated
30,000 crossed the border into North Ossetia, inside the
Russian Federation, while some 128,000 people were
displaced across Georgia.

Since many IDP shelters were without cooking facilities,
WFP tried to provide prepared foods, such as bread and
high energy biscuits, where possible. The organization
supplied wheat flour to bakeries to supply free bread to
the IDPs. It also provided food to soup kitchens set up
by the government and charities to provide the
displaced with hot meals.

WFP responded quickly to the crisis, using food stocks
from its existing operation to feed 212,000 vulnerable
people in Georgia, many of them newly displaced.
Initially, the operation was restricted to the capital,
Tbilisi, where only two days after the crisis erupted,
WFP was able to provide a 10-day ration of wheat flour,
vegetable oil, beans, sugar and salt to 322 IDPs in
shelters. The operation soon expanded to other parts
of the country. By the end of August, WFP had reached
more than 138,000 people, including IDPs and local
populations affected by the conflict.

On 27 August, WFP opened a sub-office in Gori and
established a warehouse to supply the town and
villages in the “buffer zone”. WFP also delivered flour to
three bakeries in Gori to supply bread to some
9,000 people. The first distribution in the buffer zone
took place on 11 September, after WFP negotiated
access with the general commanding Russian forces.
WFP later expanded its activities throughout the zone
after the Russians withdrew.
In Georgia as a whole, WFP had by 30 September
delivered 1,388 tons of wheat flour, 148 tons of high
energy biscuits, 118 tons of vegetable oil, 421 tons of
pasta, 177 tons of beans, 67 tons of sugar and 19 tons
of salt to more than 138,000 beneficiaries in all affected
parts of the country outside South Ossetia. By the end
of the year, WFP had reached 244,000 beneficiaries with
8,500 tons of food assistance.

In the early days of the conflict, continued fighting cut
off access to Gori and other combat zones. WFP still
managed to begin regular dispatches of food to Gori
on 18 August, though South Ossetia remained a
no-go area from the Georgian side. Tension eased on
8 September, when Moscow agreed to withdraw its
forces from all Georgian territory outside Abkhazia and
South Ossetia within a month and to dismantle its

On 18 August, the UN launched a flash appeal for
$59.7 million to meet emergency humanitarian needs
over six months as a result of the conflict. Under the
appeal, the food sector’s needs were estimated at
$15.8 million, including $12.9 million for WFP to provide
basic food rations. A revised appeal, putting the food
security sector’s needs at $32 million, with $20 million
for WFP, was issued in early October. WFP also appealed
for $2.5 million to provide logistics coordination and
inter-agency storage capacity and transport.

A WFP convoy brings essential food to
thousands of Georgians who took refuge in
a valley south of the city of Gori.

20

These people will soon receive
food from WFP at a distribution
point in Georgia.

21

Security

Workers collect WFP food from
small boats ferrying it to the
beach at Merka in southern
Somalia from the ships MV Rozen
and MV Semlow. The ships were
escorted from Mombasa,
Kenya, by the French frigate
Commandant Ducuing to protect
them against pirate attacks.

22

SOMALI PIRACY

the WFP staff and partners who managed to succeed
despite significant demand increases year on year.

Piracy exploded in 2008 in the waters off Somalia, and
grew at such a pace — 111 attacks with 42 ships
hijacked that year — that it fast became an issue of
global significance. WFP asked the international
community to provide naval escorts for WFP food
shipments as 90 percent of WFP food assistance to
Somalia must arrive by sea.

Hosting families that were forced to flee Mogadishu,
some farmers in southern Somalia said they had never
needed WFP food assistance but now desperately did
in 2008. Conflict, drought, displacement, a series of
failed harvests, high food and fuel prices, hyperinflation
and unemployment only added to the numbers across
the country who relied upon WFP food distributions to
survive.

And the world stepped forward. A succession of
countries generously contributed frigates to escort
ships loaded with WFP food. They also provided the
funds needed to buy food from as far away as South
Africa — and the numbers of those in need were
mounting each month.

Those in need of humanitarian assistance rose
77 percent in 2008 to 3.25 million — nearly half the
population — with 3.1 million people requiring food
from WFP and other organizations. WFP food
distributions showed a steady rise in 2006 and 2007
and a sharp acceleration in 2008 from 9,000 tons in
January to 30,000 tons in December.

Since the naval escort system began in November
2007, following a call by Executive Director Josette
Sheeran for international protection to stop millions
of Somalis from going hungry, not a single ship
loaded with WFP food has been attacked by pirates.
During 2008, escorts for WFP shipments were
provided by naval vessels from Canada, Denmark,
France, NATO, the Netherlands (for two tours of duty)
and the European Union.

Refugees International and the United Nations branded
Somalia the world’s worst humanitarian crisis. The
country was also named the number one failed state
by Foreign Policy magazine and labelled the world’s
most corrupt by Transparency International. But WFP
and its brave staff kept life-saving food flowing to
Somalia despite the dangers.

There was still a tragic price paid in human terms: the
more than 40 civil society activists and humanitarian
workers attacked and killed in 2008, including two
WFP staff and five WFP contract workers. They were
the first killings of WFP staff members in Somalia
since 1993.

KENYA POST-ELECTION VIOLENCE
In Kenya, 2008 dawned with unexpected violence.
Orderly elections a few days earlier had turned into a
chaotic and contested counting process, which quickly
sparked demonstrations and fatal clashes in Mombasa,
Nairobi and the Rift Valley.

But countless lives were saved by WFP food arriving by
land and sea. Not only did dedicated WFP staff make it
possible, but staff from our partner NGOs risked their
lives distributing it. The 260,000 metric tons of WFP food
shipped to Somalia in 2008 is almost four times the
amount shipped in 2007, three times that of 2006 and
eight times that of 2005. This is a strong testimony to

By the time international mediators had helped bring
the violence to an end, more than 1,000 people had
been killed and up to 300,000 displaced, many of them

23

Security
living in camps dotted around the Rift Valley towns of
Eldoret, Naivasha and Nakuru, often near police stations
and churches.

assistance. Working through a combination of local
NGOs, civil society groups and churches, WFP
distributed vital supplies to some 160,000 people living
in the slums of Nairobi and the western town of
Kisumu.

In cooperation with the government and the Kenya
Red Cross, WFP moved food to those desperately in
need, diverting stocks of high energy biscuits from
refugee camps in the north and expediting deliveries
from Mombasa. The security situation forced the need
for escorts through much of the worst affected areas.
An advance team and vehicles were swiftly dispatched
to Eldoret, at the heart of the early violence, and a
helicopter was flown in from WFP’s Sudan operation to
assist with rapid assessment missions.

Although distributions in the slums were phased out as
the situation normalised, WFP continued its assistance to
displaced people in camps through much of the year,
and then to those who returned to their homes via
transit centres towards the end of 2008.
The operation came when many northern and eastern
parts of Kenya were in the grip of a fierce drought,
affecting about 900,000 people. Events across the
border in Somalia also prompted a major influx of
60,000 refugees into Kenya, creating a further challenge
for WFP in the country.

In the urban areas, WFP and its partners faced a
different challenge — how to target those most
affected by the violence and most in need of

South of Eldoret, Kenya, military
forces help clear roadblocks to allow
passage of food assistance.

24

WFP delivers food to Kenyans
displaced by the civil unrest that
followed national elections.

25

Nutrition

Children benefit from food distributed by
WFP in Badakhshan, Afghanistan.

26

AFGHANISTAN’S HUNGRY CITIES

government and WFP launched a joint appeal for funds
in late January, and embarked on a feeding
programme to provide close to 46,000 metric tons
of wheat to 1.1 million urban dwellers.

Every month the WFP-chartered trucks arrive in
downtown Kabul, ready to hand out food to local
residents despite the bustling market nearby, stalls
overflowing with fresh fruit and vegetables and
hanging slabs of newly slaughtered meat. A
contradiction perhaps, but the reasons are
straightforward. Food in Afghanistan has become
so expensive that many of the poorer residents of the
Afghan capital can no longer afford to feed themselves.

The 240 kg individual ration, delivered over a period of
three months, was aimed at four categories of people:
•
•
•
•

Bibi Shirin is one of those people. A 50-year-old widow,
she lives in Kabul with seven children, including a
disabled son, and two grandchildren. “The price of
bread jumped from four Afghanis to 20,” she
complained. “For my family, that was only enough
bread to last two days.”

Households headed by disabled individuals
Households with eight or more people with
unreliable sources of income
Recent returnees and internally displaced people
Households headed by females, the disabled or
the elderly who did not receive food assistance
under WFP’s existing protracted relief and
recovery operation.

In the summer, the government and WFP were forced
to issue another joint appeal for funds when drought
ravaged the Afghan harvest, reducing expected crop
yields by one-third. A second round of urban feeding
was launched, targeting roughly the same number of
1.1 million urban residents with a similar ration.

Bibi was earning about 1,300 Afghanis (roughly $26)
each month, weaving scarves that she sold in the
market. “I used to be able to buy a kilo of sugar and half
a kilo of tea with no problem,” she said, “but then all of
a sudden everything became too expensive and it was
too hard for me to feed my family properly. And I was
one of the lucky ones, as I own my own house. For
people paying rent it was even worse.”

At the height of the food price crisis in 2008, studies
found that some Afghan families were spending up to
85 percent of their income on food, compared to
56 percent in 2005.

Asked about the impact of paying out so much of her
small income on food alone, Bibi looked down at her
leg and pulled a used bandage out of her handbag.
“I suffer from rheumatism, my daughter-in-law is ill and
my disabled son is sick most of the time. Now we don’t
have enough money to buy medicine. The prices have
gone up for meat, wheat, medicine and fuel.”
Studies conducted jointly by WFP and government
agencies in 2008 found that food and fuel prices had
pushed 2.5 million people in Afghanistan to needing
food and nutrition assistance to survive. Almost half
reside in urban areas. To meet the crisis, the

Afghans benefit from a
UNHCR-WFP beekeeping
and food distribution
programme in Nanakzai.

27

Nutrition
BEATING NORTH DARFUR’S HUNGER GAP

Initially targeted to reach 180,000 children, the
supplementary feeding programme focused on
mothers and community leaders, who received
training to raise awareness about malnutrition and its
relationship to food, health and care-giving practices.
They also learned about the composition of the WFP
blended food ration they were receiving: a mixture
of dried skimmed milk, sugar and corn-soya blend
enriched with essential vitamins, minerals and other
micronutrients.

In August, WFP embarked upon an ambitious
campaign in North Darfur to help bridge the area’s
annual hunger gap, the lean season between harvests
when malnutrition wreaks havoc among the region’s
children. For four months, ending in November, WFP
delivered a monthly ration of 500 g of vegetable oil
and nearly 5 kg of pre-mixed and fortified blended
food to 172,000 children in North Darfur. They were all
in the vulnerable age bracket between six months and
five years old.

The pre-mixed blended food was produced and
packaged at a newly-built facility in El Fasher, capital
of North Darfur, where three blending machines —
procured in South Africa and airlifted to El Fasher —
provided a daily output of 25 to 30 metric tons. WFP
supervised quality control and hygiene, as it does in
similar local projects globally, especially in the
processes involving dried skimmed milk, a delicate
commodity.

The campaign was a blanket supplementary feeding
programme for children that complemented general
food distributions. It was launched as a preventive
measure to counter threats to child health and
nutrition at a traditionally precarious time of the year.
Even at the best of times, hunger is a chronic problem
in North Darfur. Global acute malnutrition rates in
North Darfur amongst youngsters under five have
regularly exceeded 20 percent during the hunger
season, well above the 15 percent rate universally
recognized as constituting an emergency. Surveys
carried out in 2008 immediately after the harvest found
56 percent of the population remained food insecure
despite the availability of newly harvested crops.

Donor generosity helped make the programme
possible, in particular the critical dried skimmed
milk component that was provided by Austria and
Switzerland. As the first large-scale blanket
supplementary feeding progamme launched in
North Darfur, the project is still growing. As
feedback has been positive, WFP plans to expand
the programme in 2009 to more than
300,000 children in South and West Darfur.
Given the current security environment in Darfur,
considerable challenges exist in operating effective
supplementary feeding programmes, particularly in
rural areas without health infrastructure. But WFP is
prepared to accept the challenge to improve the life
and livelihoods of the six million people who the
organization assists in Sudan, including three million
in Darfur.

Sudanese school girls enjoy
fatur (breakfast) during School
Feeding Cooks Training in
El Fasher Town, North Darfur.

28

WFP food distributions reach Lesotho’s
most vulnerable, including people with
HIV, children orphaned by AIDS, pregnant
and nursing mothers and the elderly.

KEEPING CHILDREN IN SCHOOL IN
LESOTHO

the late 1960s. Since then, the programme has
helped millions of hungry children by providing
them with food and better nutrition and the chance
of a brighter future. About 80,000 children still
receive a hot, nutritious meal in Lesotho on a daily
basis. Globally, WFP feeds 20 million children in
school in 68 countries every day.

Watching Malintle Mantutle presiding over her school
full of pupils, it is hard to imagine her as anything other
than a teacher. But you cannot teach if you do not
finish primary school and she was almost forced to
drop out due to poverty and hunger.

Mantutle is now principal of Maphutseng Primary
School. She is also studying for her Bachelor of
Education degree from the National University of
Lesotho. None of this would have been possible
without WFP’s school feeding programme, and that
would have been an enormous loss not only for
Mantutle, but also for the generations of primary
school students who benefit daily from her
teaching and guidance.

“The cost of education meant that it wasn’t easy for
my parents to send me to school,” says 45-year-old
Mantutle, especially as any money spent on education
meant less money to feed the family. “My five brothers
and sisters and I all looked forward to going back to
school after the holidays because WFP made sure that
we ate a proper lunch every day.”
Mantutle was one of the first children to benefit
from WFP’s school feeding programme in Lesotho in

29

Countering
Climate
Change
Despite the richness of natural
resources in the Amhara region in
northwest Ethiopia, low agricultural
productivity due to recurrent
drought has left many people
chronically food insecure.

30

MERET: REGENERATION IN ETHIOPIA

and WFP, the programme draws its name from the
Amharic word for land, meret, which is a convenient
acronym for the programme — Managing
Environmental Resources to Enable Transitions to
More Sustainable Livelihoods.

Mohamed Hussein stands on a ridge, looking down
on the terraced hillside that, he says, “changed my life
completely”.
The field climbs in terraced steps up a slope in the
highlands of Amhara in northern Ethiopia, not far
from the border with neighbouring Afar. It has been
freshly ploughed and seeded with sorghum, except
for a spot halfway up the slope where seven orange
trees, heavy with ripening fruit, occupy a single
terrace.

Under MERET, chronically food-insecure communities
participate in environmental rehabilitation and
income generating activities designed to improve
livelihoods through the sustainable use of natural
resources. Its primary objective is to build resilience
to the kind of shocks that struck Ethiopia in 2008.
Some of those shocks were economic, such as high
food and fuel prices, while others were
environmental, like the prolonged drought that was
related to climate change, according to experts.

“This used to be nothing more than a gully,” says the
45-year-old farmer, gesturing down at the field. “When
the rains came, the water would rush down the hill,
carrying all the good topsoil with it.”

Among the programme’s many activities are
measures to build and rehabilitate feeder roads,
reforest barren hillsides, restore springs and rainwater
ponds, and reconstruct and refurbish agricultural
terraces.

All that began to change five years ago, when
Mohamed’s gully was selected as a MERET project.
A joint venture between the Ethiopian government

Residents of Ethiopia’s southern Rift Valley region
leave a WFP distribution point with food.

31

Countering Climate Change
WFP provides the food for those involved in
implementing the projects — 3 kg of cereal per
workday to each participant for up to three months.

Close to 400,000 other Ethiopians might well echo that
view, thanks to their participation in MERET projects at
213 sites across Ethiopia during 2008. Among the
programme’s many achievements, not least was the
reclamation of more than 86,000 hectares of
degraded land.

The organization also supplies tools, construction
materials and other utensils as well as expert advice
to build local capacity, and teaches farmers the latest
techniques.

BANGLADESH FLOOD HOUSES

In Mohamed’s case, the restoration of his gully began
with the construction of a 2.5 metre-high wall at the
bottom of his hill to hold the rainwater runoff and, most
importantly, the topsoil. Every year, Ethiopia loses
1.5 billion tons of topsoil through erosion. It is a major
contributor to food insecurity in the country.

When Asma married at the age of 16, as many girls
do in Bangladesh, she had the same hopes of a better
future as all young newlyweds. But Asma’s dreams
were not to be realised. Her new husband, seven
years her senior, was ill and unable to support a
family. Asma, now 34, had no choice but to be the
breadwinner in a family of five that also includes two
sons, Masud, 10, and Mamun, 4, and a daughter,
Kona, 6 months.

Once the wall was in place, additional terrace walls
were gradually erected at intervals up the steep slope.
The terrace walls trapped the rainwater, which could
then slowly percolate down into the soil rather than
simply wash away. Over time, the terraces filled with
soil, deep enough to allow Mohamed to plant his
seven orange trees.

Life was made even harder by the family’s location
in a village alongside the River Teesta in northern
Bangladesh, one of the most food-insecure areas of
the country. During the monsoons the river swells
over its banks, causing flooding and severe soil
erosion. Asma, like thousands of her neighbours,
had to move several times as her tiny mud house
was washed away.

Five years later, Mohamed now holds a sustainable and
increasingly profitable asset. “That field never used to
produce more than a quintal-and-a-half (150 kg) of
sorghum,” he says. “Last year, I harvested 100 quintals
[1,000 kg]”.

“My life consisted of nightmares only,” says Asma.
“When food prices went up and rice was 35 taka
[52 US cents] a kilogram, we had to skip two meals a
day. I could not afford to send my children to school”.

His orange trees supply an added bonus, providing a
cash crop worth 3,000 Ethiopian birr ($300). With the
proceeds, Mohamed has been able to purchase
livestock — seven sheep, two oxen, two donkeys and
a cow — to augment his assets. He has also managed
to move homes, transporting his wife and four
children from the small, thatched-roof mud hut at the
bottom of the hill to a new home near the top of the
slope with wood-framed windows and a rainproof,
corrugated metal roof. “Our life is so much better
now,” he says.

Asma enrolled in the Enhancing Resiliency (ER)
project, one of the programmes that WFP has
implemented with the government of Bangladesh
and NGOs to respond to, and prepare for, natural
disasters. Asma took part in a six-month mandatory
food-for-training course on disaster preparedness,

32

These women and their families,
victims of severe flooding, benefit
from distributions of fortified wheat
flour in northern Bangladesh.

Since 2001, 1.3 million women have received training
on disaster preparedness and 30,000 houses have
been raised — 4,000 of them under the ongoing
ER programme. A newly-confident Asma says, “As an
ER participant I raised my house with the help of WFP
and my co-workers. Now floods will not be able to
wash away whatever assets we have. I can
concentrate on my cow-rearing project. My children
are back in school. And, most importantly, I have
dreams for the future”.
Bangladesh is one of the countries most vulnerable
to the effects of climate change. Experts predict that
climate change could affect more than 70 million
Bangladeshis due to the country’s geographic
location, low elevation, high population, poor
infrastructure, high levels of poverty and high
dependence on natural resources.

In northern Bangladesh,
flood-affected residents
live as refugees where
their villages once stood.
This family continues to
live in its flooded dwelling
in Kurigram.

which helped her to assess and reduce disaster risks,
as well as acquire skills that will enable her to
generate her own income. Asma received 2.5 kg of
rice and 37.5 taka every day during her time on the
ER project.

WFP has been helping communities adapt to climate
change in Bangladesh for over two decades. In
partnership with the government, WFP planted
37 million trees and helped create or rehabilitate:

Asma then joined together with 34 of her neighbours
to raise their houses above flood levels. This backbreaking work entailed collecting and carrying
550 cubic meters of soil, weighing nearly two tons, from
the river banks and ditches and building a foundation
for her new house on higher ground. Asma’s house took
14 days to raise, at a cost of just $700.

•
•
•
•
•
•

33

25,000 km of roads above flood levels
11,000 km of river and coastal embankments
4,000 km of canals for drainage and irrigation
2,300 acres of water bodies for fish culture
1,000 drinking water tanks
400 water tanks for rainwater harvesting and
conservation in drought-prone areas

Food Flights

UN planes in South Sudan —
essential for bringing food,
cargo and aid workers where
they are needed most

34

WFP AVIATION

vast areas are flooded and completely impassable.
Without UNHAS to fly aid in, there is no way the
needs of these areas could be met.”

When an emergency strikes, often the only way to
provide life-saving assistance is by air. Working on
behalf of the entire humanitarian community, WFP’s
aviation unit is among the first to respond, carrying
aid workers and cargo to the most difficult and
remote areas of the globe.

Despite increasing needs, WFP Aviation faced
significant funding shortages in 2008. Central African
Republic reduced the number of aircraft in operation
and some flights in Sudan had to be temporarily
suspended due to a lack of funding. Operations in
Niger, Sri Lanka and West African coastal regions
remain critically underfunded.

In 2008, using 58 aircraft chartered for long-term
operations and 73 strategic airlifts, WFP Aviation flew
47,000 hours, transporting 360,000 passengers and
15,200 metric tons of cargo, at a cost of almost
$155 million. In 2008, the passenger service know
as UNHAS — the UN Humanitarian Air Service —
carried 12 percent more people than in 2007. They
came from UN agencies (60 percent), NGO partners
(30 percent), donors and media (10 percent). Ad hoc
flights transporting food and other items were
managed on behalf of UNICEF, UNHCR, FAO,
NGO partners and others.

Elsewhere, WFP continued its collaboration with the
logistics company TNT, providing aviation training for
290 participants from WFP, other UN agencies, NGOs
and national civil aviation authorities. WFP further
developed its cooperation with the International
Committee of the Red Cross in field operations and
air safety. WFP’s Aviation Safety Unit also played an
active role in enhancing the capacity of civil aviation
authorities in Africa and Asia and conducting safety
management courses with the International Civil
Aviation Authority.

In response to emergencies, special air operations
were launched in Haiti, Madagascar, Mozambique
and Myanmar. In Myanmar alone, 10 helicopters were
chartered for more than 20,000 passengers and
5,000 metric tonnes of relief goods during an eightmonth operation. Medical and security evacuations
were also carried out in Chad, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Somalia and Sudan. Sudan remained WFP’s
largest air operation by far. In 2008, UNHAS Sudan
carried 207,000 people and 1,600 metric tons of
cargo with 18 fixed-wing aircraft and five helicopters
flying 23,000 hours. The total expenditure for the
operation was $56 million.

These two helicopters — themselves cargo inside a larger
Australian Defence Force aircraft — are en route from
South Africa to Thailand, where they became essential
to WFP’s Myanmar relief operations.

In a public statement supporting UNHAS Sudan’s
work, 14 international aid agencies wrote, “Much of
our work meeting the enormous humanitarian and
development needs across Sudan would not be
possible without these flights…for months at a time,

35

Funding and
Resources
The food from this WFP-run
wheat flour facility in Rangpur,
Bangladesh, is distributed to
vulnerable people who cannot
support themselves.

36

Contributions to WFP for 2008 exceeded $5 billion,
a record level in WFP’s history. More than $1 billion
of total contributions was attributable to the
extraordinary March appeal to address high food and
fuel prices, which drew contributions from 28 donors.
The largest single contribution was $500 million, from
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Operations in Africa received the largest share of
directed contributions, 67 percent. Asian countries
followed with 22 percent. Countries in the Middle East
received 7 percent of the funding, and Central and
South America received 4 percent.
A larger proportion of contributions was received
earlier in the year. Confirmed contributions at the end
of March were 19 percent higher than March 2007,
and were almost double for June from a year earlier.

Donor support for Emergency Operations was strong,
with 85 percent of funding needs met. Development
Operations were also strongly supported, with
84 percent of needs met, but only 70 percent of the
needs of Protracted Relief and Recovery Operations
(PRROs) were filled. Special Operations were the least
well supported, with only 60 percent receiving the
funding they needed, although some resources were
recovered by providing local services for the
humanitarian community.

Twinning partnerships in 2008 enabled six
governments to make contributions to WFP of
75,800 metric tons of in-kind food, which was then
matched with $12 million in cash from other donors
to cover associated costs and reach full cost recovery.
This allowed WFP to receive more food and to feed
a greater number of people with less delay.

Development activities received $406.2 million in
2008, the highest amount since 2000 and a 45 percent
increase compared to 2007. The number of donors
also increased, with 41 donors supporting
Development Operations in 2008, including several
recipient governments; however, as a proportion of
total contributions, Development Operations fell
to the lowest level ever.

WFP received $137 million of bilateral contributions for
programmes outside of its regular programme of work.
The number of donors continued to increase, reaching
98 by year end. Sixty-six donor nations were not part
of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development. Nine governments supported WFP for
the first time: Argentina, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
East Timor, the Republic of Guinea, Iraq, Mali, Mexico
and Tanzania.

In 2008, 82 percent of contributions were directed, or
specified to assist certain operations or activities, while
18 percent were multilateral, or not earmarked for any
particular programme — compared to just 9.5 percent
of non-earmarked funds in 2007. This was an
encouraging trend, as multilateral funding increases
the flexibility of WFP to allocate funds where it is
most needed.
Nearly four-fifths of multilateral contributions —
$526 million — was used for relief operations. Overall,
multilateral funds were used to support operations in
77 countries.

A girl receives muchneeded food from a WFP
distribution site at Al
Salam IDP Camp in North
Darfur, Sudan.

37

Funding and Resources

At this school in
Liberia, children
receive meals donated
by Saudi Arabia
through WFP’s school
feeding programme.

WFP’s $7 billion requirement represented 38 percent
of total 2008 CAP/flash requirements. WFP received
94 percent of the amount it requested in CAP/flash
appeals.

Another welcome development was the increase in
contributions from recipient countries. In 2008,
38 government donors who were also recipients of
WFP assistance provided almost $140 million, up from
$56 million from 20 recipient countries in 2003.

Food as a sector was relatively well-funded in CAPs,
with 87 percent of requirements met in 2008. WFP was
the main recipient of contributions for food-related
needs. The impact of WFP nutrition interventions was
blunted, however, due to lack of similar levels of
support for related sectors involving the provision of
clean water and basic health services.

Despite the expanded donor base, the bulk of funding
came from a limited number of donors. WFP’s
10 largest donors during the year accounted for
82 percent of the resources received, continuing the
trend of previous years. Saudi Arabia, Spain and various
United Nations funds all entered the ranks of WFP’s top
ten donors. The 20 largest donors accounted for
96 percent of contributions, while the average
donation from all country donors increased from
$31 million in 2007 to more than $51 million in 2008.

Revenue generated during 2008 amounted to
$5.1 billion, 61 percent of which was in cash and
39 percent from in-kind contributions. Total expenses
for 2008 were $3.7 billion. The remaining $1.4 billion
is set aside for outstanding commitments to vendors
and others, held in trusts for certain programmes,
and held as reserves for one month of operating
expenses.

During 2008, WFP took part in 11 Consolidated Appeal
Processes (CAPs), 12 flash appeals and 13 appeals
classified by the UN Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs as “other appeals”.

38

WFP works closely with local partner
Concern to monitor food distributions
in Zimbabwe.

39

Partnerships

Residents assist in food
distribution at Horebo
camp in eastern DRC.

40

PRIVATE SECTOR PARTNERS

As the momentum to enhance WFP’s food basket
grew, the private partnerships team worked with
many industry leaders to explore partnership
opportunities. This culminated in a renewed
agreement with Kemin Industries to support a
quality control programme and the provision of
food technology expertise to WFP country offices.

In 2008, WFP celebrated a year of milestones in
terms of support from the private sector. Early in the
year, WFP’s Executive Board endorsed a ten-year
vision and strategy for expanding private sector
partnerships and fundraising.
As the year progressed, one major global
corporation became a partner of WFP and many
leaders in the food industry expressed a strong
willingness to help WFP expand its food basket to
include ready-to-use foods. At the same time, two
foundations increased their support, while outreach
to online donors grew exponentially and cash
donations tripled.

In addition to developing new micronutrient powder
sachets for home fortification, global partner DSM
increased its commitment to WFP with direct support
to cyclone victims in Bangladesh.

Kurigram village in northern
Bangladesh struggles to recover
from severe flooding that has
left its residents with even
fewer food options.

The year ended with companies and foundations
giving $145 million in cash, which included a
$66 million grant for P4P from the Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation.
Reinforcing WFP’s continued efforts to raise the
profile of the organisation among the public and
collect money from private individuals, the second
year of the Yum! World Hunger Relief Campaign was
even more successful than the first. More
restaurants in more countries participated in the
campaign, with notable additions in Europe and the
Middle East. Yum! Brands also expanded its
commitment to WFP at the Clinton Global Initiative
in New York, where CEO David Novak pledged
$80 million to WFP and other hunger relief
organisations over the next five years.

WFP’s emergency information and communication
technology (ICT) team reaped the rewards of a new,
three-year partnership with the Vodafone FoundationUN Foundation. Aimed at bringing timely ICT help to
disaster zones, the partnership enabled five emergency
ICT deployments in 2008 and supported inter-agency
training for ICT experts from around the world.

Long-term partner Unilever ramped up its number
of campaigns, with eight new countries raising
funds and awareness of hunger for WFP school
feeding programmes. WFP also became the
cornerstone of the company’s corporate social
responsibility platform in Europe.

WFP’s first corporate partner, TNT, continued its support
of WFP school feeding as well as extending invaluable
help as a logistics stand-by partner in emergencies
such as Haiti and Myanmar. Support from TNT also
enabled WFP to again have a strong presence at the
World Economic Forum in Davos.

41

Partnerships

Women harvest what they can from
farms in Kampala, Uganda.

When the high food price crisis hit WFP programmes
mid-year, the private sector rallied in the form of large
donation for West Africa from the Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation. Like the Gates Foundation, the
Howard G. Buffett Foundation made a sizeable
grant to WFP’s P4P initiative, raising its total
contributions to the project over the past two years
to $12 million. After five successful years, the Dutch
Postcode Lottery renewed its support to Niger.

WFP’s private sector donor base broadened
significantly in 2008, sourcing donations from
150 donors (against 84 in 2007), with 41 percent
of donations coming from corporations and 39 percent
from foundations.
The US remained the largest source of private sector
donors, followed by Europe, with the Netherlands in
the lead. Funds from the private sector went to WFP
operations all over the world, but Africa was the
predominant region supported. Nearly
$7 million was raised for WFP’s emergency
operations in Myanmar.

The internet was another growth area in 2008, bringing
in more than $2 million, nearly double the total of
2007. Online fundraising at www.wfp.org was an
integral part of the year’s flagship Fill the Cup school
feeding campaign.

The Private Partnerships Division’s self-financing model
continues to grow, with a four-fold increase in
management fees charged to corporate donors. In
2008, fees totalled more than $3 million.

In addition to the $145 million raised through the
private sector in cash, another $49 million was
garnered through in-kind donations, such as
advertising and consultancy services.

42

A farmer examines maize
he has harvested in
Kapchorwa, Uganda.

43

Annexes

A cargo ship loaded with WFP food aid
arrives at the Mogadishu harbour,
escorted by a Dutch warship.

44

45

-

46

-1

São Tomé and Principe

Rwanda

Niger

Namibia

3 110

-

13 323

5 445

768

37 290

791

31 615

14 973

9 934

54 996

1 796

35 141

19 458

63 551

6 595

-

13 855

3 888

Mauritania

Mozambique

6 004

6 834

Malawi

Mali

4 472

Madagascar

Liberia

2 630

Lesotho

-

16 417

Kenya

Guinea-Bissau

2 099

9 005

2 818

3 242

Ghana

Guinea

311 209

64 364

10

25 031

-

3 943

21 892

59 007

2 138

The Gambia

Ethiopia

Eritrea

1 103

Côte d’Ivoire

Djibouti

-

Congo, Dem. Rep. of the

3 983

41 806

2 460

-

Chad

Congo

2 004

-

951

37 603

833

942

43 986

1 698

557

Central African Republic

Cape Verde

-

1 050

Cameroon

Burundi

2 766

Burkina Faso

-

2 124

Benin

Angola

Relief

258 884 2 282 892

SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA

GRANDTOTAL

Development

-

-

184

-

-

-

-

-99

-

150

-

-

-

208

-

-

-

-

-

1 795

3 016

-

5 987

-

-

-

1 096

-

-

6 793

196 724

SO

2005

-

-

-

-

-

-

257

360

693

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

619

-

-

-

-

-

-

2 119

100

-

-2

23

Bilaterals

768

18 768

44 069

791

45 470

18 861

17 025

61 261

6 960

35 290

22 088

79 968

3 110

12 455

4 918

2 148

336 239

64 364

5 046

24 306

62 023

3 983

50 254

3 702

557

2 001

40 818

3 699

3 067

50 777

2 892 401

Total
Relief

816

5 196

6 602

-

7 504

3 753

3 662

6 743

3 425

-

2 876

17 180

-

3 004

1 892

2 037

19 037

-

1 089

-

-

-

4 271

2 675

932

1 625

-

5 199

2 266

-

-

17 396

31 519

2 488

29 365

9 768

12 662

41 785

525

33 832

7 761

134 400

3 844

7 493

1 369

92

174 461

-9 904

4 208

21 058

43 464

2 748

46 270

4 345

-

1 115

46 029

605

875

21 210

268 210 1 962 307

Development

-

-

35

-

-

-

-

-

-

450

-

1 553

-

165

-

-

882

-

-

2 466

4 409

-

4 767

209

-

-

876

-

-

6 844

236 336

SO

2006

-

-

-

-

2

-

572

136

64

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

267

-

-

-

-

-

0

65

394

-

-

11 764

Bilaterals

816

22 592

38 157

2 488

36 871

13 521

16 897

48 664

4 014

34 282

10 638

153 134

3 844

10 662

3 261

2 129

194 380

-9 904

5 297

23 791

47 874

2 748

55 308

7 228

932

2 740

46 970

6 199

3 141

28 054

2 664 994

Total

Relief

956

6 794

5 813

-

12 832

4 519

3 544

12 809

3 966

-

1 331

28 532

-

4 149

2 275

1 919

17 836

-

1 488

-

-

-

4 669

2 147

789

1 953

-

4 027

2 336

-

-

8 711

16 853

6 369

22 206

14 693

8 360

30 402

9 327

31 477

10 199

153 561

5 078

6 848

1 838

896

148 862

241

3 125

23 289

71 776

2 808

62 028

19 768

-

1 402

38 257

6 864

528

3 457

309 318 2 005 656

Development

-

-

-

-

2 509

-

-

-

598

3 166

-

8 205

-

929

316

-

164

-

-

270

4 459

-

5 615

3 104

-

-

0

-

-

839

166 244

SO

2007

-

-

-

-

95

-

1 237

1

0

206

128

-

-

14

-

-

2 040

-

-

288

-

-

-

-

-

1

456

855

-

-

272 090

Bilaterals,
Trust Funds
and Others3

956

15 505

22 666

6 369

37 643

19 212

13 142

43 212

13 891

34 850

11 658

190 298

5 078

11 940

4 430

2 815

168 902

241

4 613

23 847

76 234

2 808

72 312

25 019

789

3 356

38 713

11 747

2 864

4 296

2 753 308

Total

Relief

635

7 477

10 997

-

9 231

6 993

4 565

12 823

4 554

969

1 368

25 022

-

5 895

2 779

2 933

19 658

-

701

-

-

-

3 815

2 641

673

2 057

-

4 668

4 333

-

-

11 586

18 394

3 313

29 813

20 666

6 880

15 961

7 891

27 277

9 355

136 528

3 316

13 209

6 218

916

261 831

137

7 526

16 286

93 902

3 411

78 844

28 948

-

5 997

31 738

8 531

294

3 503

292 112 2 733 744

Development

-

-

1 990

-

2 909

-

-

-

675

3 727

-

681

-

621

284

-

2 578

-

-

257

7 422

-

12 056

4 570

-

698

-

-

-

-

200 252

SO

20084

-

279

-

-

102

-

2 133

74

-

7

204

61

-

8

-72

-

3 337

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

108

982

-

-

309 639

Bilaterals,
Trust Funds
and Others3

635

19 343

31 382

3 313

42 055

27 659

13 577

28 858

13 120

31 980

10 927

162 293

3 316

19 733

9 209

3 849

287 404

137

8 227

16 543

101 323

3 411

94 714

36 160

673

8 752

31 845

14 182

4 627

3 503

3 535 746

Total

Annex 1
DIRECT EXPENSES1 BY COUNTRY, REGION AND PROGRAMME CATEGORY, 2005–2008

22 761

-

6 092

8 147

Zambia

47

4 346

815

2 096

3 849

-

-

Maldives

Myanmar

-

12 748

Pakistan

Philippines

10 919

Nepal

Lao, People’s Dem. Rep. of

-

-

19 511

5 762

9 119

-66

55 402

-

266

103 392

Korea D. P. R. of

12 721

India

-

Islamabad Cluster

9 933

China

7 159

-

1 641

Cambodia

-

18 247

92 260

Indonesia

2 287

Bhutan

-

16 629

Bangladesh

145 704 1 762 296

-

67 450

-

409

-

17 517

228

-

2 623

-

8

-0

29 008

-

-

-

-

-

1 779

130 188

106

-

-

-

-

-

110 879

-

-

75

-

4 861

67 998

52 010

43 649

110 744

289

10 774

684 970

480

22 761

13 330

6 221

Total

-

-

-

-

-

-

0

-

1 375

-

-

358

-

1 061

-

-

49 776

16 909

9 119

4 719

4 664

55 410

-67

133 775

12 986

9 933

9 158

2 287

35 938

94 040

4 688 2 042 876

0

548

-

-

-

-

-5

-

-

-

-

-

Special Bilaterals
Oper.

43 863

Afghanistan

ASIA

TOTAL REGION

Other Regional Expenditure

Zimbabwe

103 952

6 791

Uganda

United Rep. of Tanzania

37 556

289

10 779

-

-

569 691

Swaziland

4 400

Togo

Sudan

South Africa

-

9 128

4 127

480

2 860

3 361

Senegal

Sierra Leone

Somalia

Relief

Development

2005

6 621

98 870

53 634

33 199

98 696

465

8 136

465 543

-

53 465

5 753

2 703

Relief

-

14 497

15 215

-

-

3 092

-

-

-

14 990

181

1 943

1 694

42 113

-

4 551

45 346

9 599

9 527

366

1 305

9 964

-

63 145

-

-

11 238

-

4 125

81 938

130 139 1 517 868

66

-

6 501

5 409

4 557

-

-

3 191

893

-

4 275

3 464

Development

-

-

53 438

531

-

2 943

-

-

-

27 047

-

-

-

-

-

12 934

112 399

757

-

-

-

-

-

-

88 897

-

-

90

SO

2006

7 444

98 870

60 135

38 608

103 253

465

8 136

557 631

893

53 465

10 118

6 167

Total

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1 835

-

-

759

-

3 283

-

4 551

113 281

25 345

9 527

3 309

4 397

9 964

-

92 026

14 990

181

13 940

1 694

49 521

94 872

1 501 1 761 907

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Bilaterals

3 173

97 913

13 654

31 004

107 029

1 836

11 155

463 199

-

64 508

7 335

3 557

Relief

-

14 368

15 703

-

-

4 356

-

-

-

14 879

-

2 028

3 711

65 185

-

11 588

11 187

21 463

11 307

-

2 965

33 699

49

36 876

-

-

13 459

-

12 387

118 893

154 001 1 513 588

20

-

5 205

8 683

3 437

-

-

3 340

894

-

4 885

2 853

Development

-

-

4 171

152

-

-

-

-

-

5 171

-

-

-

-

-

14 821

134 782

123

-

-

-

2 440

59

-

98 693

-

3 169

123

SO

2007

3 302

97 938

18 859

39 719

113 140

1 896

11 155

588 886

894

67 678

12 350

6 418

Total

-

85

-

-

-

-

-

-

2 989

6 403

-

2 883

-

1 858

6

11 588

29 812

37 318

11 307

-

7 321

33 699

49

45 036

21 282

-

18 371

3 711

79 430

133 719

29 269 1 831 640

-14

25

-

33

234

-

-

23 653

-

-

7

8

Bilaterals,
Trust Funds
and Others3

958

155 610

19 090

22 345

113 236

3 817

9 432

531 255

77

168 086

11 169

5 101

Relief

-

24 623

6 238

-

-

5 788

-

-

-

8 855

-

1 777

2 210

33 119

-

8 327

21 829

38 150

54 559

-

3 648

73 026

-

24 290

577

402

18 059

-

62 476

189 836

165 351 1 892 447

0

-

7 438

6 684

4 228

-

-

5 375

-10

-

3 392

3 458

Development

-

-

260

-

26 606

-

-

-

-

1 007

-

-

-

-

-

14 636

141 532

0

-

0

-

363

217

-

91 546

-

10 696

242

SO

20084

1 307

155 610

26 529

29 233

117 827

4 034

9 432

635 316

67

178 781

14 803

8 559

Total

-

79

-

-

-

-

-

-

728

9 696

-

351

-

-658

369

8 327

46 792

44 388

81 165

-

9 436

73 026

-

26 025

19 128

402

20 187

2 210

94 938

204 841

14 916 2 214 246

349

-

0

205

-

-

-

7 141

-

-

-

-

Bilaterals,
Trust Funds
and Others3

(thousand dollars)

13 234

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Kyrgyzstan

Russian Federation

Serbia and Montenegro

Tajikistan

Other Regional Expenditure

TOTAL REGION

5 548

48

3 632

Bolivia

Guyana

-

705

2 164

El Salvador

-

19

5 750

Guatemala

Ecuador

Dominican Republic

Cuba

-

-

Belize

Colombia

-

Barbados

-

-

245

6 819

1 403

204

-0

1 840

11 041

646

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

35 874

-

8 019

4

4 622

-

-

Azerbaijan

2 345

2 103

379 069

Georgia

-

-

Albania

Armenia

EASTERN EUROPE AND CIS

TOTAL REGION

71 047

9 893

43

Other Regional Expenditure

1 331

-

Timor-Leste

400

-

53 482

278

Sri Lanka

Relief

Thailand

Development

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

63 343

5 138

-

-

7 041

SO

2005

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2 794

-

-

-

-

Bilaterals

245

8 983

2 107

204

19

7 590

11 041

4 279

-

-

35 874

-

13 234

-

8 019

4

4 622

5 548

2 345

2 103

516 254

15 074

1 331

400

60 801

Total

-

879

422

-

2

4 245

0

3 500

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

94 317

-

-

-

592

Development

-

14 169

1 871

1 146

-

862

12 544

1 452

-

166

32 044

-

13 709

-3

5 931

-

4 589

5 084

2 725

8

274 646

4 091

7 275

-

22 175

Relief

-

-

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

18

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

99 285

1 568

-

-

824

SO

2006

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

5 877

-

-

-

-

Bilaterals

-

15 048

2 293

1 146

2

5 106

12 544

4 952

-

184

32 044

-

13 709

-3

5 931

-

4 589

5 084

2 725

8

474 125

5 659

7 275

-

23 591

Total

-

2 423

1 226

-

-

2 036

-

3 325

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

121 606

-

-

-

1 376

Development

-

4 132

1 431

890

569

265

15 480

3 968

145

28

33 597

-

7 780

-

8 212

-

4 381

7 836

5 388

-

320 518

-

8 576

-

38 070

Relief

-

-

77

144

-

-

-

-

-

36

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

28 096

451

-

-

3 329

SO

2007

-

-

-

63 433

-

-

3 858

306

-

-

6

-

-

-

-

-

6

-

-

-

14 436

-

-

-

213

Bilaterals,
Trust Funds
and Others3

-

6 555

2 734

64 467

569

2 301

19 338

7 599

145

64

33 603

-

7 780

-

8 212

-

4 387

7 836

5 388

-

484 657

451

8 576

-

42 988

Total

-

2 874

2

-

-

2 332

-

3 434

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

83 631

-

-

-

1 021

Development

-

5 291

300

2 186

3 057

1 802

17 071

6 773

50

84

37 192

16 685

-

6 185

69

8 956

1 473

3 824

-

551 548

-

7 838

-

48 528

Relief

-

-

51

9

-

-

-

-

-

2

555

-

-

-

-

555

-

-

-

44 522

55

-

-

1 958

SO

20084

-

-

3 483

77 090

-

-

2 587

1 184

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

11 046

-

285

-

195

Bilaterals,
Trust Funds
and Others3

-

8 165

3 837

79 284

3 057

4 134

19 658

11 391

50

86

37 747

16 685

-

6 185

69

9 510

1 473

3 824

-

690 747

55

8 123

-

51 702

Total

Annex 1 - cont.
DIRECT EXPENSES1 BY COUNTRY, REGION AND PROGRAMME CATEGORY, 2005–2008

31 831

41 188

-

345

-

49

-

76

4 310

-

-

-

-

-

-

2 890

-

1 420

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

233 601

91 333

111

7 891

1 036

36 625

-

1 265

24 339

500

7 271

384

1 501

10 411

71 984

1 478

1 352

856

10 416

-

-

1 922

14 687

Total

-6 594

10 128

-

4 499

3 544

-

-

-

-

516

-

-

1 568

-

30 177

1 511

1 816

-

2 371

-

-

4 269

11 200

Development

-13 207

102 383

-

2 033

2 868

69 993

-

-

470

-

12 915

826

-

13 278

48 776

20

4 474

17

5 226

112

32

1 445

10 542

Relief

-

-

-

-

-

1 157

1 736

-

-

-

-

-

497

1 239

-

-

-

-

-

473

198

-

17

SO

126 769

2 818

-

-

69

0

-

-

-0

-

59

-

2 684

6

98 793

-

13 934

-

-

-

-

17 262

-

Bilaterals,
Trust Funds
and Others3

108 124

117 065

-

6 532

6 481

69 993

-

497

1 709

516

12 974

826

4 251

13 285

178 219

1 729

20 223

34

7 597

112

32

22 976

21 742

Total

4 001

12 358

-

7 045

639

-

-

-

138

-

-

4 536

-

26 771

1 737

4 191

-

8 658

-

-

1 894

1 649

Development

13 571

138 288

21

5 797

19 069

52 244

-

-

-

37 144

1 238

-

22 776

100 697

113

4 945

53

7 236

314

1

966

50 455

Relief

5 964

194

-

-

-

-

-

194

-

-

-

-

-

7 485

1

-

2

-

-

-

-

7 419

SO

(*) Including funds from the United Nations Security Council Resolution 986, “Oil-for-food” Agreement.

Negative figures represent financial adjustments.

2008 Expenses presented according to International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) are not comparable to 2007 and previous years, where WFP applied the United Nations System Accounting Standards (UNSAS)

7 666

15 783

-

-

-

-

-

1 265

14 519

-

-

-

-

-

1 202

608

-

-

-

-

-

-

Bilaterals

Includes all Expenses for Bilaterals, Trust Funds, General Fund and Special Accounts.

30 261

-

-

-

-

-

575

SO

4

9 223

61 150

78

649

110

36 625

-

-

6 930

-

5 851

384

112

10 411

46 339

-

0

281

2 777

-

-

1 134

9 938

Relief

Operational Expenses includes General Fund, Special Accounts and Trust Funds that cannot be apportioned by project/operation, which are cumulated under the column ‘Total’ (2004-2006).

139 801

10 090

33

7 241

926

-

-

-

-

500

-

-

1 389

-

24 442

869

1 351

-

7 639

-

-

788

4 748

Development

3

-17 472

84 116

34

7 514

3 900

24 432

16

2 326

-

409

28 940

763

4 452

11 330

73 480

504

4 309

-

9 082

-

-

3 643

21 473

Total

20084

Excludes programme support and administrative costs.

32

10 013

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

10 013

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Bilaterals

2007

2

8 836

2 699

-

-

-

-

-

2 326

-

-

374

-

-

-

461

159

-

-

-

-

-

-

302

SO

2006

1

-5 472

OTHER 2

-

34

55 629

527

6 988

15 774

-

24 432

16

-

-

8

18 553

763

-

11 330

3 900

-

TOTAL REGION

Other Regional Expenditure

Yemen

Syrian Arab Republic

Occupied Palestinian Territory

-0

-

Libya

Morocco

-

Lebanon

402

Iraq*

Jordan

-

4 452

Iran

Egypt

Algeria

-

1 103

3 207

-

2 255

-

-

2 112

13 520

Relief

MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

TOTAL REGION

Other Regional Expenditure

Peru

Panama

6 828

-

Mexico

Nicaragua

-

1 530

Honduras

Jamaica

7 651

Haiti

Development

2005

151 649

8 289

-

-

45

-0

-

-

-

8 244

-

-

-

123 739

-

43 239

-

-

-

-

-3 844

-

Bilaterals,
Trust Funds
and Others3

175 185

159 130

21

12 842

19 753

52 244

-

194

138

45 388

1 238

4 536

22 776

258 692

1 851

52 375

55

15 893

314

1

-983

59 523

Total

(thousand dollars)

Annex 2
TOTAL CONFIRMED CONTRIBUTIONS1 IN 2008 (thousand dollars)

Donor

Total

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

2 000

1 000

58

10

ANDORRA
ARGENTINA

100

AUSTRALIA

112 132

AUSTRIA
BANGLADESH

Development

Emergency

IRA

PRRO

48
100

7 005

14 411

3 935

9 590

899

60 720

7 187

7 187
696

BHUTAN

5

BOLIVIA

233

BOTSWANA

151

151

1 441

200

996

1 253

18 955

16 162

1 393

1 491
5
233
1 241

15

15

BURKINA FASO

1 857

BURUNDI

2 431

2 431

CAMBODIA

2 164

2 164

CANADA

4 244

3 037

24 784

BULGARIA

Others*

1 000

BELGIUM

BRAZIL

SO

581

275 392

51 965

CHINA

9 576

2 000

COLOMBIA

1 276

36 122

10 381

168 405

17

7 500

58

1 103

1 000

103

CONGO

800

800

CROATIA

62

50

CUBA

74
200

200

CZECH REPUBLIC

817

155

57

605

DENMARK

56 544

33 827

4 082

9 118

ECUADOR

248
1 211

EL SALVADOR

200

ESTONIA

242

EUR. COMMISSION
FAROE ISLANDS

355 435

1 127

12
74

CYPRUS

EGYPT

7 394

2 972

6 545
248

602

237

372
200

17 494

41

121

155 412

150 820

80
30 036

30

1 673
30

FINLAND

28 257

9 077

5 492

621

12 127

939

FRANCE

40 878

2 186

4 603

503

30 295

756

2 535

100 479

31 632

7 101

57 728

1 295

2 723

GERMANY
GHANA

4 550

GREECE

8 613

300

GUINEA

59

59

HAITI
HOLY SEE
HONDURAS
HUNGARY
ICELAND
INDIA
INDONESIA
INTERN. ORGANIZAT. FOR MIGRATION

4 550
2 327

975

975

520

10
67

453

65

65

2 104

1 603

17 130

3 573

1

500
12 041

2 000

1 516

2 000

43

43

40 000

40 000

IRELAND

39 820

6 612

2 327

20 434

5 151

5 296

36 018

1 308

22 631

30

30

ITALY

103 348

27 267

16 125

JAPAN

177 900

21 233

47 593

89

42

KENYA

6 036

1 286

KOREA, REPUBLIC OF

2 601

JORDAN

5 985

10

IRAQ
ISRAEL

1

817

106 351

1 905
47

4 750
900

50

1 501

200

Donor
LIECHTENSTEIN
LITHUANIA

Total

Development

303
27
14 276

3 549

MADAGASCAR

2 411

2 408

MALAYSIA
MALI
MAURITANIA
MEXICO

IRA

PRRO

96

206

1 082

5 113

4
176

1 237

1 230

8

50

50

157

105

16 200

16 200

79

79

NETHERLANDS

117 435

2 247

19 428

4 944

80 569

NEW ZEALAND

14 069

4 080

2 030

2

2 654

53 466

9 744

7 171

9 813

25 449

90

1 000

OPEC FUND

2 437
1 925

PANAMA

22

POLAND
PORTUGAL
PRIVATE DONORS**
ROMANIA
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
SAUDI ARABIA
SINGAPORE

20

297

1 164

964

200

143 752

5 000

2 500

1 022

944

2

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

3 215

85 946

7 500
1 786

500 000

57

15

2
33

315
115 288

103

175
18 660

6 616

140
13 243

22 686

4 353

49 730

21 467

3 814

42 890

741

12 762

11 627

1 837

23 704

2 918

3 286

11
45 668

UNITED KINGDOM

15 669
301

15 000

SWITZERLAND

TIMOR-LESTE

11 837

503 753

81 673

TURKEY

111
27 084

301

SWEDEN

THAILAND

22

111

72

SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC

1 347

317

135

SRI LANKA

25
1 289
50

SLOVENIA
SOUTH AFRICA

5 303

1 876

SLOVAKIA

SPAIN

10 248

25

PAKISTAN
PERU

3 694

4

176

105

NORWAY

837

539

MONACO

NICARAGUA

Others*

3

539

MOZAMBIQUE
NEPAL

SO

27

LUXEMBOURG
MALAWI

Emergency

11
2 295

63

63

138

20

4 100

1 700

118

2 400

350

350

171 050

3 072

34 652

2 066 286

96 502

812 912

217 405

2 088

57 087

223

105 606

22 508

4 990

1 133 157

22 190

1 525

103 110

45 801

9 303

UN CERF COMMON FUNDS
AND AGENCIES
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA
VENEZUELA
WORLD BANK
ZAMBIA, REPUBLIC OF
GRAND TOTAL

50
94

94

750
11 143

750
6 850

1 900

2 030
5 041 818

2 393

2 030
406 213

1 346 697

Bilateral Contributions

1

16

50

59 506

2 312 240

171 980

745 182
136 727

All figures are based on data from the Resource Mobilization System (RMS) and donor contribution year 2008.

* Others: contributions to Trust Funds, Special Accounts, and the General Fund.
** Private contributions do not include extraordinary gifts in kind such as advertising.

51

WFP Executive Board 2008-2009

Member States 2008

Member States 2009

Algeria
Australia
Belgium
Burundi
Canada
Cape Verde
Colombia
Cuba
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Finland
Germany
Guinea
Haiti
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Republic of
Italy
Japan
Kuwait
Mexico
Netherlands
Norway
Pakistan
Peru
Philippines
Russian Federation
Slovenia
Sudan
Sweden
Thailand
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United Republic of Tanzania
United States of America
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Angola
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Burundi
Canada
Cape Verde
China
Colombia
Cuba
Czech Republic
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Denmark
Egypt
Germany
Guatemala
Guinea
Haiti
India
Iran, Islamic Republic of
Japan
Kuwait
Netherlands
Norway
Pakistan
Peru
Philippines
Russian Federation
Slovenia
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Thailand
United Kingdom
United States of America
Zambia

Executive Board Bureau Members 2008

Executive Board Bureau Members 2009

H.E. José Eduardo Dantas Ferreira Barbosa
Cape Verde (President)

Vladimir V. Kuznetsov
Russian Federation (President)

Evgeny F. Utkin
Russian Federation (Vice President)

H.E. José Antônio Marcondes de Carvalho
Brazil (Vice President)

Lamya Ahmed Al-Saqqaf
Kuwait

Kiala Kia Mateva
Angola

Manuel Antonio Álvarez Espinal
Peru

Noel D. de Luna
Philippines

H.E. James Alexander Harvey
United Kingdom

H.E. James Alexander Harvey
United Kingdom

52

Table of Contents

Notes

Acronyms used

CAP

Consolidated Appeals Process

ISC

indirect support costs

CERF

Central Emergency Response Fund

LDC

least-developed country

CFSA

crop and food supply assessment

LIFDC

low-income food-deficit country

CP

country programme

MERET

Managing Environmental Resources Better to Enable
Transitions to Sustainable Livelihoods

DEV

development project
NGO

non-governmental organisation

DSC

direct support costs

P4P

Purchase for Progress

EMOP

emergency operation

PRRO

protracted relief and recovery operation

ER

Enhancing Resilience

SO

special operation

FAO

Food and Agriculture Organization

UNHAS

United Nations Humanitarian Air Service

UNHCR

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees

of the United Nations
ICT

information and communication technology

IDP

internally displaced person

UNICEF

United Nations Children’s Fund

IRA

Immediate Response Account

VAM

vulnerability analysis and mapping

General notes
• All monetary values are in United States dollars, unless otherwise stated.
• One billion equals 1,000 million.
• All quantities of food are in metric tons (mt) unless otherwise specified.
• Direct expenditures include food, external transport, LTSH, DSC and ODOC components, but exclude ISC.
• In some tables, totals are rounded and so may not add up exactly.
• LIFDCs include all food-deficit (net cereal-importing) countries with a per capita income below the historical ceiling used by the World Bank to determine
eligibility for International Development Association (IDA) assistance and for 20-year International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) terms;
the designation LIFDC is applied to countries included in the World Bank categories I and II. The historical ceiling of per capita gross national product (GNP)
for 2005, based on the World Bank Atlas method, is $1,675. In 2007, 82 countries were classified by FAO as LIFDCs.
• Three criteria are used to identify LDCs, as proposed by the United Nations Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked
Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States (UN-OHRLLS) Committee for Development Policy: i) low-income based on a three-year estimate of
gross national income (GNI): per capita under $750 for inclusion, above $900 for graduation; ii) human resource weakness involving a composite human assets
index (HAI) of nutrition, health, education and adult literacy; and iii) economic vulnerability, involving a composite economic vulnerability index of
agricultural production, exports of goods and services, manufacture share in GDP, merchandise export concentration, handicap of economic smallness and
percentage of population displaced by natural disasters.

Photo credits
COVER: Courtesy of Howard G. Buffett; TABLE OF CONTENTS: Myanmar, WFP/Eddie Gerald; Page 2: Myanmar, Photo: WFP/Naho Asai; Page 4: Sudan, WFP/Fred
Noy; Page 5: Myanmar, WFP/Edith Champagne; Page 6: Myanmar, WFP/KyawZaw Tun; Page 7: (a) Haiti, UN/MINUSTAH/Logan Abassi; (b) Georgia,
ECHO/Daniela Cavini; Page 10: Myanmar, WFP/Photolibrary; Page 11: Myanmar, WFP/Edith Champagne; Page 12: (a) Myanmar, WFP/KyawZaw Tun; (b)
Myanmar, WFP/Eddie Gerald; Page 13: Myanmar, WFP/Eddie Gerald; Page 14: Myanmar, WFP/Eddie Gerald; Page 16: (a) Haiti, WFP/Darlyne Jeanty; (b) Haiti,
WFP/Vincenzo Sparapani; Page 18: DRC, WHO/Christopher Black; Page 19: DRC, WHO/Christopher Black; Page 20: Georgia, Bruno Stevens/Cosmos; Page
21: Georgia, Uwe Schober/ Rupert Beagle Photography; Page 22: Somalia, WFP/Peter Smerdon; Page 24: Kenya, WFP/Marcus Prior; Page 25: Kenya,
WFP/Marcus Prior; Page 26: Afghanistan, WFP/Marcelo Spina; Page 27: Afghanistan, UNHCR/Roger Arnold; Page 28: Sudan, WFP/Carla Lacerda; Page 29:
Lesotho, WFP/Stephen Wong; Page 30: Ethiopia, WFP/Natasha Scripture; Page 31: Ethiopia, Photo: WFP/Barry Came; Page 33: (a) Bangladesh, Photo
courtesy of Brent Stirton/Getty Images; (b) Bangladesh, Photo courtesy of Brent Stirton/Getty Images; Page 34: Sudan, WFP/Mikael Bjerrum; Page 35:
Thailand, Reuters/Sukree Sukplang; Page 36: Bangladesh, Photo courtesy of Brent Stirton/Getty Images; Page 37: Sudan, WFP/Carla Lacerda; Page 38:
Liberia, UNMIL/Christopher Herwig; Page 39: Zimbabwe, WFP/Richard Lee; Page 40: DRC, WFP/Marcus Prior; Page 41: Bangladesh, Photo courtesy of
Brent Stirton/Getty Images; Page 42: Uganda, WFP/Marco Frattini; Page 43: Uganda, WFP/Marco Frattini; Page 44: Somalia, Franco Pagetti/ VII.

ISSN 1020-1753 P0902/E15,000/5.09 - Printed by Quintily S.p.A.

World Food Programme

Via Cesare Giulio Viola, 68/70 - 00148 Rome, Italy
Tel.: +39-066513-2628 • Fax: +39-066513-2840
E-mail: wfpinfo@wfp.org

wfp.org

World Food Programme - Annual Report 2009

Division of Communications, Public Policy
and Private Partnerships

World Food
Programme
2009

