2011

2011

The State of

Food Insecurity in the World
How does international price volatility affect
domestic economies and food security?

The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2011 highlights the differential impacts
that the world food crisis of 2006-08 had on different countries, with the poorest
being most affected. While some large countries were able to deal with the worst
of the crisis, people in many small import-dependent countries experienced large
price increases that, even when only temporary, can have permanent effects on
their future earnings capacity and ability to escape poverty.
This year’s report focuses on the costs of food price volatility, as well as the
dangers and opportunities presented by high food prices. Climate change and an
increased frequency of weather shocks, increased linkages between energy and
agricultural markets due to growing demand for biofuels, and increased
financialization of food and agricultural commodities all suggest that price volatility
is here to stay. The report describes the effects of price volatility on food security
and presents policy options to reduce volatility in a cost-effective manner and to
manage it when it cannot be avoided. It will be important to provide improved
market information, create gender-sensitive safety nets that are designed in
advance and can be implemented quickly in times of crisis, and invest in agriculture
for the long-term to make it more productive and resilient to shocks.

The State of

Food Insecurity in the World
How does international price volatility affect
domestic economies and food security?

Cover photos: All photos are from the FAO Mediabase.

ISBN 978-92-5-106927-1

Copies of FAO publications can be requested from:
SALES AND MARKETING GROUP
Office of Knowledge Exchange, Research and Extension
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00153 Rome, Italy

E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
Fax: (+39) 06 57053360
Web site: http://www.fao.org/catalog/inter-e.htm

9

7 8 9 2 5 1

0 6 9 2 7 1
I2330E/1/07.11

Key messages
NOTES for Annex
Table - table
1
Small import-dependent countries, especially in Africa,
were deeply affected by the food and economic crises.
Some large countries were able to insulate themselves from the
crisis through restrictive trade policies and functioning safety
nets, but trade insulation increased prices and volatility on
international markets.
High and volatile food prices are likely to continue.
Demand from consumers in rapidly growing economies will
increase, population continues to grow, and any further
growth in biofuels will place additional demands on the food
system. On the supply side, there are challenges due to
increasingly scarce natural resources in some regions, as well as
declining rates of yield growth for some commodities. Food
price volatility may increase due to stronger linkages between
agricultural and energy markets, as well as an increased
frequency of weather shocks.
Price volatility makes both smallholder farmers and poor
consumers increasingly vulnerable to poverty. Because
food represents a large share of farmer income and the budget
of poor consumers, large price changes have large effects on
real incomes. Thus, even short episodes of high prices for
consumers or low prices for farmers can cause productive
assets – land and livestock, for example – to be sold at low
prices, leading to potential poverty traps. In addition,
smallholder farmers are less likely to invest in measures to raise
productivity when price changes are unpredictable.
Large short-term price changes can have long-term
impacts on development. Changes in income due to price
swings can reduce children’s consumption of key nutrients
during the first 1 000 days of life from conception, leading to a
permanent reduction of their future earning capacity,
increasing the likelihood of future poverty and thus slowing the
economic development process.
High food prices worsen food insecurity in the short
term. The benefits go primarily to farmers with access to
sufficient land and other resources, while the poorest of the
poor buy more food than they produce. In addition to harming
the urban poor, high food prices also hurt many of the rural
poor, who are typically net food buyers. The diversity of
impacts within countries also points to a need for improved
data and policy analysis.

High food prices present incentives for increased
long-term investment in the agriculture sector, which can
contribute to improved food security in the longer term.
Domestic food prices increased substantially in most countries
during the 2006–08 world food crisis at both retail and
farmgate levels. Despite higher fertilizer prices, this led to a
strong supply response in many countries. It is essential to build
upon this short-term supply response with increased
investment in agriculture, including initiatives that target
smallholder farmers and help them to access markets, such as
Purchase for Progress (P4P).
Safety nets are crucial for alleviating food insecurity in
the short term, as well as for providing a foundation for
long-term development. In order to be effective at reducing
the negative consequences of price volatility, targeted
safety-net mechanisms must be designed in advance and in
consultation with the most vulnerable people.
A food-security strategy that relies on a combination of
increased productivity in agriculture, greater policy
predictability and general openness to trade will be more
effective than other strategies. Restrictive trade policies can
protect domestic prices from world market volatility, but these
policies can also result in increased domestic price volatility as a
result of domestic supply shocks, especially if government
policies are unpredictable and erratic. Government policies that
are more predictable and that promote participation by the
private sector in trade will generally decrease price volatility.
Investment in agriculture remains critical to sustainable
long-term food security. Such investment will improve the
competitiveness of domestic production, increase farmers’
profits and make food more affordable for the poor. For
example, cost-effective irrigation and improved practices and
seeds developed through agricultural research can reduce the
production risks facing farmers, especially smallholders, and
reduce price volatility. Private investment will form the bulk of
the needed investment, but public investment has a catalytic
role to play in supplying public goods that the private sector
will not provide. These investments should consider the rights
of existing users of land and related natural resources, benefit
local communities, promote food security and not cause undue
harm to the environment.

1.

World Food Summit goal: halve, between 1990–92 and 2015, the
number of undernourished people.

2.

Millennium Development Goal 1, target 1C: halve, between 1990 and
2015, the proportion of people who suffer from hunger. Indicator 1.9
Proportion of population below minimum level of dietary energy
consumption (undernourishment).

3.

Latest report period refers to 2006–08 estimates and baseline refers
to 1990–92. For countries that did not exist in the baseline period, the
1990–92 proportion of undernourished is based on 1993–95 and the
number of undernourished is based on their 1990–92 population and
his proportion.

4.

The colour indicator shows the progress that is projected to be
achieved by year 2015, if current trend continues:
Target already met or expected to be met by 2015
Progress insufficient to reach the target if prevailing trends
persist
No progress or deterioration
Country has a proportion of undernourishment below
5 percent

6.

7

Countries revise their official statistics regularly for the past as well as the
latest reported period. The same holds for population data of the United
Nations. Whenever this happens, FAO revises its estimates of
undernourishment accordingly. Therefore, users are advised to refer to
changes in estimates over time only within the same The State of Food
Insecurity in the World publication and refrain from comparing data
published in editions for different years.
Country composition of the special groupings: least-developed countries,
landlocked developing countries and small island developing states:
5.
Includes: Afghanistan, Angola, Bangladesh, Benin, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Haiti, Kiribati, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali,
Mauritania, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Niger, Rwanda, Samoa,
Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, Sudan, United Republic of Tanzania, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Uganda, Vanuatu, Yemen and Zambia.

Includes: Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Central African Republic, Chad,
Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lesotho, Macedonia (The former Yugoslav Republic), Malawi, Mali,
Republic of Moldova, Mongolia, Nepal, Niger, Paraguay, Rwanda,
Swaziland, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Uzbekistan, Zambia and
Zimbabwe.
Includes: Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Cape
Verde, Comoros, Cuba, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Fiji Islands,
French Polynesia, Grenada, Guinea Bissau, Guyana , Haiti, Jamaica,
Kiribati, Maldives, Mauritius, Netherlands Antilles, New Caledonia,
Papua New Guinea, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent/Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Seychelles,
Solomon Islands, Suriname, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago and
Vanuatu.

Developing countries for which there were insufficient data are not included
in the table.
8.
In addition to the countries listed in the table, includes: Democratic
Rep. of the Congo, Somalia, Cape Verde, Comoros, Djibouti, Guinea
Bissau, Sao Tome and Principe, and Seychelles.
9.
In addition to the countries listed in the table includes: Afghanistan
and the Maldives.
10. In addition to the countries listed in the table, includes: Myanmar,
Brunei Darussalam and Timor-Leste.
11. In addition to the countries listed in the table, includes: Iraq and
Occupied Palestinian Territories.
12. In addition to the countries listed in the table, includes: Antigua and
Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Dominica, Grenada, Netherlands
Antilles, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia and Saint
Vincent/Grenadines.
13. In addition to the countries listed in the table includes Belize.
14. Includes: Fiji Islands, French Polynesia, Kiribati, New Caledonia, Papua
New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu.
KEY
—
Proportion less than 5 percent of undernourished
na
Data not available
ns
Not statistically significant
SOURCES
Total population: UN Population Prospects, 2008 revision.
Undernourishment: FAO estimates.

2011
The State of

Food Insecurity in the World
How does international price volatility affect
domestic economies and food security?

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
Rome, 2011

The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product
do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the International Fund for
Agricultural Development (IFAD) or of the World Food Programme (WFP) concerning
the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities,
or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The mention of specific
companies or products of manufacturers, whether or not these have been patented,
does not imply that these have been endorsed or recommended by FAO, IFAD or WFP
in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned.

The designations employed and the presentation of material in the maps do not imply
the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of FAO, IFAD or WFP concerning
the legal or constitutional status of any country, territory or sea area, or concerning the
delimitation of frontiers.

ISBN 978-92-5-106927-1

All rights reserved. FAO encourages the reproduction and dissemination of material in
this information product. Non-commercial uses will be authorized free of charge, upon
request. Reproduction for resale or other commercial purposes, including educational
purposes, may incur fees. Applications for permission to reproduce or disseminate FAO
copyright materials, and all queries concerning rights and licences, should be addressed
by e-mail to copyright@fao.org or to the Chief, Publishing Policy and Support Branch,
Office of Knowledge Exchange, Research and Extension, FAO, Viale delle Terme di
Caracalla, 00153 Rome, Italy.

© FAO 2011

Foreword

Undernourishment around the world:
		 impact of the 2006–08 price shock
8

8
10

The crises hit the poor and the weak
Revising FAO’s methodology for measuring hunger

11		

Recent trends in world food commodity prices:
		 costs and benefits
11		

Past and future trends in world food prices

13		

Costs and benefits of high and low food prices

18		

Costs and benefits of volatile and unpredictable prices

21		

Lessons from the world food crisis of 2006–08

32		

Policy options to address price volatility
		 and high prices
34		

Preventing domestic price volatility in the short term:
trade policies and buffer stocks

37		

Coping with likely future price volatility: risk management for
smallholder farmers and governments

39		

Coping with price volatility after the fact:
targeted safety nets and emergency food reserves

42		

Preventing price volatility in the long term: increasing the productivity,
sustainability and resilience of agriculture

44

Technical annex

44		

Annex table
Prevalence of undernourishment and progress towards the World Food
Summit (WFS) and the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) targets in
developing countries

48

Notes

C O N T E N T S

4

F O R E W O R D
4

S

mall import-dependent countries, especially in Africa, were deeply affected by the food
and economic crises. Indeed, many countries are still in crisis in different parts of the
world, particularly the Horn of Africa. These crises are challenging our efforts to achieve
the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of reducing the proportion of people who suffer from
hunger by half by 2015. Even if the MDG were to be achieved by 2015 some 600 million people
in developing countries would still be undernourished. Having 600 million human beings suffering
from hunger on a daily basis is never acceptable. The entire international community must act
today, and act forcefully and responsibly to banish food insecurity from the planet.
This edition of The State of Food Insecurity in the World focuses on food price volatility. Our
organizations continue to monitor food prices, and have alerted the world through a number of
analytical reports on food price trends and ongoing volatility in recent years, as these continue to
be a matter of concern for governments and people around the world. Indeed, high and volatile
food prices are widely expected to continue in the future. Thus, we are pleased that in 2011 the
Group of 20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors (G20) have been actively pursuing
policy options for reducing food price volatility.
By using previously unavailable data sources and studies, this report digs underneath the globalscale analyses to find out what happened on domestic markets and to draw lessons from the world
food crisis of 2006–08. In particular, the report emphasizes that the impact of world price changes
on household food security and nutrition is highly context-specific. The impact depends on the
commodity, the national policies that affect price transmission from world markets to domestic
markets, the demographic and production characteristics of different households and a range of
other factors. This diversity of impacts, both within and between countries, points to a need for
improved data and analysis so that governments can implement better policies. Better and more
predictable policies can not only reduce unwanted side-effects on other countries, but can
simultaneously reduce food insecurity and domestic price volatility at home. This report also
distinguishes clearly between the level of food prices and fluctuations in food prices (price volatility)
because the costs and benefits of high food prices are very different from the costs of price
volatility, especially when the fluctuations are not predictable.
We also continue to highlight the importance of the twin track approach – improving both
short-term access to food and food production in the medium term – in achieving long-lasting
improvements in food security. In the short term, it is critical to design cost-effective safety nets
that deliver the right targeted assistance to the right people at the right time. These short-term
interventions are important to poor families because even temporary interruptions in intake of
energy, protein, vitamins and minerals during the first 1 000 days of a child’s life can lead to
permanent reductions in cognitive capacities and, hence, earnings potential. In some cases, this
will be consumers whose disposable income is severely affected by higher food prices. In other
cases, it will be poor smallholder farmers who need help to cope with high input prices that, in
the absence of well-functioning credit markets, may prevent these farmers from boosting their
production and providing much-needed supplies on domestic and global markets, as well as
increasing their income.
In the long term, investment in agriculture and improving resilience among farmers remain
key to providing sustained access to food for all and reducing vulnerability to price volatility and
natural disasters such as drought. Improved seeds and farm management techniques, as well as
irrigation and fertilizer, that sustainably increase productivity and reduce production risk must be
delivered to farmers, especially smallholders, by both the private and the public sector.
Governments must ensure that a transparent and predictable regulatory environment is in place,
one that promotes private investment and increases farm productivity. We must reduce food
waste in developed countries through education and policies, and reduce food losses in
developing countries by boosting investment in the entire value chain, especially post-harvest
processing. More sustainable management of our natural resources, forests and fisheries are
critical for the food security of many of the poorest members of society.
We are optimistic that global food security will be achieved. We have made progress in the past
and will make more progress in the future, but only if we are committed to favourable policies,
market information transparency, sound analysis, good science and adequate funding for
appropriate interventions. The entire international community must commit to raising the profile of

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

the agriculture–food system not just for the next few years but until the time when everyone, at all times,
has physical, social and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food that meets their dietary
needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life. And even then, agriculture and food security
must continue to be a priority for both national governments and the global community to ensure
sustainability of achievements. Increased investment in agriculture, safety nets targeted at the most
vulnerable, and measures to reduce food price volatility need to be an integral part of this commitment.
This is the third edition of this report that has been produced collaboratively between FAO and the
World Food Programme (WFP) in what has proved to be a fruitful venture. This year, for the first time,
the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) has joined in this collaboration. With our
three organizations working together we expect the report to continue to grow in the relevance of its
analysis and robustness of its results. We also thank the United States Department of Agriculture for its
continued willingness to share its expertise and contribute to this report.

Jacques Diouf
FAO Director-General

Kanayo F. Nwanze
IFAD President

Josette Sheeran
WFP Executive Director

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

5

A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S
6

The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2011 was prepared under the overall leadership of Hafez
Ghanem, Assistant Director-General, and the guidance of the management team of the Economic and
Social Development Department. The technical coordination of the publication was carried out by
David Dawe (who was also the technical editor of the report), Kostas Stamoulis and Keith Wiebe of the
Agricultural Development Economics Division (ESA). Michelle Kendrick provided coordination for all the
editorial, graphics, layout and publishing services. Anna Doria Antonazzo provided excellent
administrative support throughout, and the staff of the Statistics Division (ESS) generated the
underlying data on undernourishment.
This is the third edition of this report that has been jointly prepared by FAO and the World Food
Programme (WFP). In addition, the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) has also
joined as a co-publisher this year. Lynn Brown (WFP) and Geoffrey Livingston (IFAD) coordinated the
support from their respective institutions. Kevin Cleaver and Shantanu Mathur of IFAD also provided
encouragement to this joint venture.
The chapter ‘Undernourishment around the world’ was prepared by the Statistics Division (ESS) of
the Economic and Social Development Department with key technical contributions provided by Carlo
Cafiero, Pietro Gennari, Josef Schmidhuber and Shahla Shapouri (the latter from the Economic
Research Service of the United States Department of Agriculture [USDA]).
The remaining three chapters were prepared by the Economic and Social Development Department
with technical contributions from Mulat Demeke (ESA); Adam Prakash and George Rapsomanikis,
Trade and Markets Division (EST); and Ana Paula de la O Campos and Elisabeth Garner, Gender, Equity
and Rural Employment Division (ESW). The box on forests and food security was prepared by Paul
Vantomme of the Forestry Department. The box on WFP’s experience during the food crisis was
contributed by Lynn Brown of WFP. George Rapsomanikis (EST) contributed the box on outcomes of
the G20 Agriculture Ministers’ Meeting.
Carlo Cafiero and Cinzia Cerri produced the Technical annex under the guidance of Pietro Gennari,
with support from Gladys Moreno-Garcia, Seevalingum Ramasawmy, Kari Rummukainen and Nathalie
Troubat of ESS.
Valuable external comments, suggestions and inputs from Derek Headey (International Food Policy
Research Institute [IFPRI]) and Peter Timmer (Harvard University) on an early draft of this report were
extremely helpful, as were comments at various stages from Ann Tutwiler, Deputy Director General for
Knowledge, FAO; Boubaker BenBelhassen in the Office of the Director-General (ODG); Erdgin Mane
(ESA); Carlo Cafiero and Josef Schmidhuber (ESS); Merritt Cluff, David Hallam and Jamie Morrison
(EST); Eve Crowley (ESW); Hubert George of the Natural Resources Management and Environment
Department, Land and Water Division (NRL); Astrid Agostini, Sophie Descargues, Guy Evers, Claudio
Gregorio, Mohamed Manssouri, Suzanne Raswant, Eugenia Serova, Garry Smith and Benoist Veillerette
of the Technical Cooperation Department, Investment Division (TCI); Louis Bockel, Karel Callens,
Arianna Carita, Richard China, Gunther Feiler, Stefano Gavotti, and David Phiri of the Technical
Cooperation Department, Policy and Programme Development Support Division (TCS); and Ganesh
Thapa of the Asia Division (IFAD). Ali Doroudian and Cristian Morales-Opazo provided invaluable
research support.
Various data were kindly shared by Solomon Asfaw and Romina Cavatassi (ESA); Erika Felix and Irini
Maltsoglou of the Natural Resources and Environment Department, Climate, Energy and Tenure
Division (NRC); Mousa Kabore (Director) and Adama Koursangama, Direction de la Prospective, des
Statistiques Agricoles et Alimentaires (DPSA), Direction Generale de la Promotion de l’Economie Rurale
(DGPER), Ministère de l’agriculture, de l’hydraulique, et des ressources halieutiques, Burkina Faso; and
Piedad Moya (International Rice Research Institute).
The readability of the report was greatly enhanced by Paul Neate, who provided English editorial
support. The language editing, graphic and layout services were provided by Flora Dicarlo and
Visiontime. Translations and printing services were provided by the Meeting Programming and
Documentation Service of the Corporate Services, Human Resources and Finance Department.

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

Undernourishment around the world: impact
of the 2006–08 price shock
The crises hit the poor and the weak
Key message
Small import-dependent countries, especially in Africa,
were deeply affected by the food and economic crises.
Some large countries were able to insulate their
markets from the crisis through restrictive trade policies
and protect their consumers through safety nets.
However, trade insulation increased prices and volatility
in international markets.

T

he estimated impact of the price shock of 2006–08 on
the number of undernourished varied markedly across
regions and individual countries.1 Different net trade
positions (e.g. exporter, importer) and different policy
responses to the price and income shocks held the key to the
range of outcomes. The countries most exposed to price
swings on international markets were typically poor and food
importers: they had few reserves and inadequate budgetary

means to procure food at high prices; they also lacked the
option of restricting exports. They had to bear the brunt of the
crisis, and domestic staple food prices rose substantially in
these countries. Most of these countries were in Africa, and
Figure 1 captures these divergent trends in undernourishment
in Africa and Asia. Between 2007 and 2008, the number of
undernourished was essentially constant in Asia (an increase
of 0.1 percent), while it increased by 8 percent in Africa.
Trade policies were an important determinant of outcomes
– many countries imposed export restrictions or reduced
import barriers. In addition to trade policies, releasing public
stocks and providing consumer subsidies were among the
most common measures adopted as countries sought to
contain the problem of rising food prices.2
Broadly speaking, three main groups of countries emerged,
distinguished by their ability to limit the price shock or
mitigate its effects. These are shown in Figure 2, which depicts
the experiences of countries along two dimensions: the
percentage change in real domestic food prices from 2007 to

FIGURE 1

Undernourishment in the world: two very different trends after the crises
Africa

Asia
Millions

Millions
240

600
2008

230
2004

220
210

2003

2005
2006

2007

580

2004
2006
2007

560

0

0

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

2005
2003

570

200

Source: FAO.

8

590

2008

Undernourishment around the world: impact of the 2006–08 price shock

2008 and the percentage change in the number of
undernourished from 2006–07 to 2009. The first group had
relatively small domestic price increases from 2007 to 2008,
coupled with progress in reducing undernourishment. These
countries are located towards the lower left of the figure. The
second group, located towards the upper left of the figure,
had relatively large domestic price increases, but made
progress in reducing undernourishment. Finally, the third
group also had relatively large domestic price increases, but
witnessed increases in undernourishment. These countries are
located in the upper right of the figure.
The first group of countries used a combination of trade
restrictions, safety nets and stock releases. This allowed
them to shelter their food markets from the international
turbulence, but the effectiveness of such policies is dependent
upon having the necessary resources to implement them.
Inclusive safety net programmes (such as those in Brazil) imply
expenditures that many countries may not be able to afford,
especially during a crisis. Export restrictions result in a loss of

government revenue and reduce the potential for farmers to
gain by increasing their production in response to higher
prices. And food stocks are expensive to hold, meaning that
poor countries may not have had the stocks available before
the crisis to compensate for any domestic production
shortfalls. This first group of countries, including China and
India, cluster in the lower left hand part of Figure 2.
Unfortunately, the export restrictions exacerbated price
increases in international markets and compounded the
impacts of food shortages in import-dependent countries.
The second group benefited from higher prices as the
majority of the poor in these countries are net food
sellers. Their incomes generally rose with higher prices even
if some of the profits were partially reduced by higher prices
for inputs such as fertilizer, seeds or fuel. These countries are
often net food exporters with a relatively equal distribution
of land (which means there are more farmers with a surplus
to sell). This group of countries, including Thailand and
Viet Nam, tend to be in the upper left hand part of Figure 2.

FIGURE 2

Differences in resilience to food price shocks across countries

2.40

2.20

Price

Price

Undernourishment

Undernourishment
Malawi

Ratio of prices in 2008 to 2007

2.00

Thailand

1.80

Afghanistan
Uganda

1.60
Bangladesh

1.40

Mozambique

Viet Nam

Senegal
Kenya

Brazil

1.20

Zambia

India

1.00

Ethiopia

China

Price

Price

Undernourishment

Undernourishment

0.80

0.60
0.60

0.70

0.80

0.90

1.00

1.10

1.20

1.30

1.40

Ratio of number of undernourished people in 2009 to 2006–07
Notes: The size of the bubbles is proportional to the number of undernourished in 2008. African countries are shown in red, Asian countries in blue and Latin American countries in green.
Prices used are inflation-adjusted retail prices of major staple foods in main markets, weighted by the population of each market and the share in energy intake of each staple food.
Source of raw data: FAO.

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

9

Undernourishment around the world: impact of the 2006–08 price shock

The third group comprises countries that generally
depend on food imports. They were exposed to higher
international prices for food commodities, were typically
without sufficient stocks, and did not have the budgetary
resources to adequately protect the food security of the poor.
These countries bore the brunt of the crisis (see countries
towards the top right of Figure 2). Many of them imported far
less on a commercial basis than was needed due to a shortage
of foreign exchange, and were forced to appeal for external
assistance and food aid. The Government of Burkina Faso, for

example, implemented subsidized sales of grain but was forced
to rely on WFP to assist 600 000 beneficiaries (through school
feeding and mother and child health centres) in 2008. The
Ethiopian Government sold about 190 000 tonnes of wheat
from its grain reserve to about 800 000 urban poor and
imported 150 000 tonnes of wheat in August/September 2008
to meet demand in urban areas, while WFP and nongovernmental organizations channelled about 200 000 tonnes
of food to the increasing number of people requiring food
assistance.

Revising FAO’s methodology for
measuring hunger
During its meeting in 2010, the Committee on World Food
Security (CFS) asked FAO to review its methodology for
estimating undernourishment in order to provide more timely
updates and incorporate all relevant information, including
analysis of the large number of household surveys that have
become available in recent years. Thus, this year is one of
transition while the FAO methodology is being revised.
Therefore, no updated estimates for the number of
undernourished people in 2009 and 2010 are reported in
this year’s State of Food Insecurity in the World, nor has an
estimate been made for 2011.
In order to improve its methodology, FAO will make
several adjustments, including in the estimation of how
changes in food access due to changes in income and food
prices affect undernourishment. Work is also underway to
improve the construction of food balance sheets. A large

10

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

number of household expenditure surveys are being
processed to provide improved estimates of the distribution
of food consumption within a country. FAO’s measures of
undernourishment will also be complemented with a number
of other indicators intended to better capture the multifaceted nature of food insecurity.
The process of revising FAO’s methodology involves
consultations with experts from around the world. The
United States National Academy of Sciences held a workshop
in February 2011 in Washington DC that provided many
suggestions, as did a round table sponsored by the CFS held
in Rome in September 2011. In addition, an International
Scientific Symposium will be held in January 2012 in Rome.
FAO considers such consultations essential for further
improving the methodology used for the measurement of
hunger.

Recent trends in world food commodity
prices: costs and benefits
Past and future trends in world food prices
Key message
High and volatile food prices are likely to continue.
Demand from consumers in rapidly growing economies will
increase, population continues to grow, and any further
growth in biofuels will place additional demands on the
food system. On the supply side, there are challenges due
to increasingly scarce natural resources in some regions, as
well as declining rates of yield growth for some
commodities. Food price volatility may increase because of
stronger linkages between agricultural and energy markets,
as well as an increased frequency of weather shocks.

P

rices of food commodities on world markets,
adjusted for inflation, declined substantially from
the early 1960s to the early 2000s, when they
reached a historic low (Figure 3). They increased slowly from
2003 to 2006 and then surged upwards from 2006 to the
middle of 2008 before declining in the second half of that
year. The sudden increases took many by surprise, and led to
increased concern over the ability of the world food
economy to adequately feed billions of people, now and in
the future. Although various observers attach differing
degrees of importance to assorted factors, there is a relatively
strong consensus that multiple factors had a role in the price
increases that began in 2003.3 These factors include:
•
weather shocks, such as drought in Australia (2005–07),
that reduced wheat production and trade;
•
policies to promote use of biofuels (tariffs, subsidies and
mandated levels of use) that increased demand for
maize and vegetable oils;
•
depreciation of the United States (US) dollar;
•
longer-term economic growth in several large
developing countries that (a) put upward pressure on
prices for petroleum and fertilizer because of the
resource-intensive nature of their economic growth and
(b) led to increased demand for meat, and hence animal
feed, as diets diversified;

•

rising production costs (e.g. irrigation pumps,
machinery) and transport costs as a result of higher
prices for petroleum and fertilizer;
slower growth of cereal yields (and production), especially
those of rice and wheat, during the past 20 years as a
result of low investment over the previous three decades;
increased demand on commodity futures markets as a
result of both speculation and portfolio diversification;
low levels of stocks, caused in part by some of the
factors noted above;
trade policies, such as export bans and aggressive
buying by governments, that encouraged producers to
withhold supplies, traders to increase stocks and
consumers to engage in panic buying.

•

•
•
•

FIGURE 3

Apart from a peak in the early 1970s, the cost of food
declined from the early 1960s until 2002, since when it
has started an upward trend
Index (2002–04 = 100)
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1961

1968

1975

1982

1989

1996

2003

2010

Note: FAO Food Price Index, adjusted for inflation, 1961–2010, calculated using international
prices for cereals, oilseeds, meats, and dairy and sugar products. The official FAO Food Price
Index has been calculated since only 1990; in this figure it has been extended back to 1961
using proxy price information. The index measures movements in international prices,
not domestic prices. The United States gross domestic product deflator is used to express
the Food Price Index in real rather than nominal terms.
Source: FAO.

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

11

Recent trends in world food commodity prices: costs and benefits

When prices declined in the second half of 2008, there
was some hope that prices would stabilize, although
probably at a higher level than before the surge. But in the
middle of 2010 they again began to increase rapidly
(Figure 3). This has renewed concerns over high prices, and
has also brought price volatility to the fore; it seems that
world food commodity prices may endure repeated episodes
of ups and downs in the future.
Will higher prices and increased volatility continue in the
future? In terms of price levels, many medium to long-term
projection models suggest that food commodity prices will
remain relatively high over the next decade or so. For
example, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD)-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2011–20204
projects that world prices for rice, wheat, maize and oilseeds
in the five years from 2015/16 to 2019/20 will be higher in
real terms by 40, 27, 48 and 36 percent, respectively, than in
the five years from 1998/99 to 2002/03.
Prices are generally expected to rise because continued
population and economic growth will put upward pressure
on demand, as will the anticipated increased use of biofuels
(depending on biofuel policies and the price of oil). On the
supply side, if oil prices continue to rise, agricultural

production costs will increase, contributing to higher food
prices. Natural resource constraints, especially climate change
and the limited availability of productive land and water in
some regions, pose substantial challenges to producing food
at affordable prices.5 On a more positive note, there remains
significant potential for raising crop productivity through
new technologies and improved extension, as well as for
reducing losses in the supply chain. However, these gains will
not materialize without increased investment. There may also
be potential for further land expansion in Africa, Central
Asia, Latin America and Ukraine, but again this will depend
on appropriate investment. Furthermore, land expansion may
also have negative environmental consequences.
There are also compelling arguments suggesting that, in
addition to being higher, food commodity prices will also be
more volatile in the future. If the frequency of extreme weather
events increases, production shocks will be more frequent,
which will tend to make prices more volatile. Furthermore,
biofuel policies have created new linkages between the price
of oil and the price of food commodities. When oil prices
increase, demand for biofuels will increase, thus raising food
prices, with the opposite happening when oil prices decrease.6
Because world oil prices have historically been more volatile

BOX 1

Some key concepts: price levels, price volatility (variability) and unpredictability of prices

In analysing food prices, it is important to distinguish
between several related, but different, concepts. One
important distinction is that between average prices over
time and variability (volatility1) of prices over time. It is
possible for average prices to change without any change
in variability. One simple way this might happen would be
if a food-importing country were to impose a constant
tariff on imports; the tariff would make food more
expensive, but in most circumstances it would have no
effect on the variability of domestic prices. Conversely, it is
also possible to have a change in price variability with no
change in the average level. This might happen, for
example, if the weather became more variable but food
production remained the same on average.
That being said, price levels and price volatility are
related – they are both determined by supply and
demand. In addition, high prices tend to be correlated
with high volatility. Initially, high prices encourage people
to draw down their stocks, which can moderate price
changes that would otherwise have been caused by
supply and demand shocks. However, once stocks have
been drawn down, the system is vulnerable to a further
supply or demand shock; the absence of the buffer means
that price variation will tend to be greater than if stocks

12

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

were available. Despite this relationship, it is still
important to distinguish between the two concepts. For
one, prices can be high but stable. For another, the costs
and benefits of high prices are very different from the
costs and benefits of volatile prices, as described in ‘Costs
and benefits of high and low food prices’ and ‘Costs and
benefits of volatile and unpredictable prices’).
Another crucial distinction is that between variability
and unpredictability. Prices exhibit variability for many
reasons, but some price changes may be largely
predictable. The classic example of predictable changes in
food prices is seasonality, whereby prices are lowest
during and soon after harvest and highest immediately
before harvest. While seasonal changes are not exactly
constant from year to year, they are often similar from
one year to the next. Weather shocks, on the other hand,
are typically unpredictable and may lead to unpredictable
changes in prices, especially if stocks are low to begin
with. Therefore, some price changes are relatively easy to
anticipate and others are much harder to predict.
Predictable changes in prices have different costs and
benefits than unpredictable changes.
1

Variability, instability and volatility are used interchangeably in this report.

Recent trends in world food commodity prices: costs and benefits

BOX 2

How to measure price volatility

The simplest way to measure price volatility is the
coefficient of variation (CV). This is the standard deviation
of prices over a particular time interval divided by the
mean price over the same interval. One advantage of this
measure is that it has no units. This makes it easy to
compare, for example, domestic price volatility measured
in different countries. However, the CV can create
misleading impressions if there are strong trends in the
data, because trend movements will be included in the
calculation of volatility. Moreover, there is no universally

than food prices, world food markets may also be subject to
increased volatility. Increased participation (e.g. by pension
funds) in financial markets that trade commodity index funds
might also lead to increased volatility, although this is a hotly
debated issue without a clear consensus.
While it is not possible to know with certainty the extent of
future increases in either the level or volatility of prices, the
risks of higher prices and greater volatility are sufficiently large
to warrant serious efforts to understand what can be done to
reduce the likelihood of increased prices or greater volatility, or
to manage the consequences when these are unavoidable. In
considering the most appropriate options to counter high and/

accepted method for removing the trend component
because different observers will have different ideas about
the nature of the underlying trend (e.g. linear, quadratic).
As an alternative to the CV, economists often use the
standard deviation of changes in the logarithm of prices.1
This also has no units, but is less affected by strong trends
over time.
C.L. Gilbert and C.W. Morgan. 2010. Review: Food price volatility.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 365: 3023–3034.

1

or volatile prices, however, it is important to remember that the
level and volatility of prices are the outcome of various forces
that affect supply and demand. Further, this report will stress
that the causes and impacts of high and/or volatile prices are
complex because they are highly context-specific, i.e. they
depend on the commodity being considered, the specific factors
(policies, exchange rates, import dependence) that affect price
transmission in various circumstances, the demographic
characteristics of households and their production and
consumption patterns, and many other variables. Thus, a crucial
message is that policy interventions should take into account
the specific context in which they are meant to be applied.

Costs and benefits of high and low food prices
Key message
In the short term, the benefits of high prices go
primarily to farmers with a large marketed surplus, and
these farmers are not the poorest of the poor. In
addition, the poorest people usually buy more food
than they sell. Thus, high food prices tend to worsen
poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition. However,
high prices represent an opportunity to spur long-term
investment in agriculture, which will contribute to
sustainable food security in the longer run.

Let us look first at the impacts of high (or low) price levels.
The level of food commodity prices has two distinct types of
effect. International market prices can affect macroeconomic
variables at the national level, such as the balance of

payments, budget deficits and exchange rates, while
domestic prices affect the poverty, energy intake and
nutrition of individuals. (The linkages between international
and domestic prices are discussed in detail under ‘Lessons
from the world food crisis of 2006–08’, pp. 21–31.)

■■ Macroeconomic impacts
The macroeconomic impacts of commodity prices are
important because they affect the level of per capita income,
which ultimately is a key determinant of living standards for
individuals and families.
Generally speaking, high international prices for food
commodities benefit countries that export those products,
while low prices benefit importing countries. Ignoring for the
moment considerations of volatility, this is basically a zerosum game in the short-to-medium run: exporters benefit at

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

13

Recent trends in world food commodity prices: costs and benefits

the expense of importers, and vice versa. In the longer term,
however, higher prices could cause some importing countries
to invest in their agriculture and reduce imports, or even
become exporters. Such investment is crucial for the
development of the agriculture sector and sustainable
reductions in poverty and food insecurity.
The effects on the balance of payments and the exchange
rate will be strongest for countries for which food trade is a
substantial share of exports or imports. Countries that export
a large proportion of their production benefit the most when
prices are high. Countries that import a large share of the
food they consume are hurt the most by high prices.
However, terms-of-trade effects are also important. For
example, a country that exports oil or metals may not need
to produce more of those products to offset higher food
prices if the price for their exports increases by more than
the price of food imports.
In terms of fiscal effects, the impact of higher food prices
will be strongest in countries where food subsidies are an
important part of the budget. For importers, the cost of
higher prices will have a direct fiscal impact if the subsidies
not only continue but are increased to offset the higher
prices. But even for exporting countries that subsidize
domestic consumption, there will be an important impact in
opportunity cost terms. In both of these cases, high levels of
subsidies can reduce funds available for investment in public
goods such as agricultural research, education, health and

roads. Reduced expenditure on these items can reduce longterm economic growth; and this has indeed happened in
Latin America.7

■■ Household-level impacts
Poor people spend a large majority of their income on food
(Figure 4), while many farmers derive much of their income
from producing food. This suggests that changes in food
prices will have large effects on the welfare of both farmers
and poorer consumers.
In order to understand the importance of higher food
prices for welfare, poverty and food security, it is important
to distinguish between net food sellers and net food buyers.
A net food seller is someone for whom the total value of the
food they produce exceeds the total value of the food they
consume, whereas for a net food buyer the reverse is true.
Net food buyers will generally be hurt by higher food prices,
while net food sellers will benefit (see Box 3).
The concepts of net food seller and net food buyer are
quite distinct from whether the household is rural or urban.
Nearly all urban dwellers are net food buyers; perhaps
surprisingly, most rural dwellers also are net food buyers.
Very-small-scale farmers and agricultural labourers are often
net purchasers of food as they do not produce enough food
for their families. They thus need to purchase food from the
market and are likely to benefit from lower prices (but see

FIGURE 4

Poor people spend much of their income on food
Percentage
80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
Bangladesh

Ghana

Guatemala

Malawi

Note: Percentage of household budget spent on food by the lowest expenditure quintile of the population.
Source of raw data: FAO Rural Income Generating Activities project.

14

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

Pakistan

Tajikistan

Viet Nam

Recent trends in world food commodity prices: costs and benefits

BOX 3

Net food sellers and buyers

The concepts of net food seller and net food buyer at the
household level are exactly analogous to the concepts of
net food exporters and importers at the country level. The
status of any particular household is determined by
subtracting the value of food consumed (including from
its own production) from the value of food produced.1
This calculation implicitly takes into account marketing
costs and seasonality by valuing production at farmgate
prices and consumption at retail prices. For example, a
household may be a net seller of food during harvest time
and a net buyer at other times. Furthermore, on an
annual basis a household might actually produce more
than it consumes in quantity terms but it could still be a
net food buyer if it sells the entire crop at harvest and
buys back from the market later, because retail prices are
higher than farmgate prices.
It is also true that whether a given household is a net
food seller or buyer may depend on the overall level of
market prices. Higher prices will discourage consumption,
encourage more production and possibly convert some
households from net buyers to net sellers. Lower prices
could do the opposite. However, it should be noted that
these ‘second round effects’ are typically marginal in their

below for a discussion of the possible impact of higher
food prices on rural wages, which are typically an important
source of income for the landless).These landless or landpoor rural households are often the poorest of the poor,
and a disproportionately large proportion of such
households are headed by women.
In urban areas, higher food prices may substantially hurt
the poor because, typically, little food is produced in such
areas and because food typically accounts for a large share
of expenditures for the poor. In order to cope with the
reduction in disposable income resulting from higher food
prices, households will engage in new economic activities,
sell assets or borrow in order to mitigate the decline in
consumption. They also commonly reduce expenditures on
health and education and shift dietary patterns towards
cheaper (starchy) foods and away from micronutrient-rich
foods such as milk, meat, and fruits and vegetables.8
Energy intake will also decline in cases where people are so
poor that they simply cannot afford the same amount of
calories at the new higher prices.
In rural areas, higher food prices will tend to have
smaller negative effects on net food buyers because many
households produce a substantial share of what they
consume, and hence are only marginal food buyers. On the
other hand, farmers who are net food sellers are likely to

impact – a household might switch from being a small net
buyer to a small net seller but not to a large net seller.2
Indeed accounting for this phenomenon has been found
to have only minor effects on the poverty impacts of
higher prices.3
This methodology of evaluating the impact of price
changes on the basis of whether a household is a net
food buyer or seller can be used to assess the impact of
changes in food prices, but not the impact of
simultaneous changes in food and input (e.g. fertilizer)
prices. If fertilizer prices increase at the same time that
food prices increase, the net impact on farmers will need
to be assessed using data on production costs (see ‘Do
fertilizer price increases cancel out farm price increases?’,
pp. 29–31 for further discussion of this issue).

N. Minot and F. Goletti. 1998. Rice export liberalization and welfare in
Vietnam. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 80(4): 738–749.
2
Ibid.
3
A. Zezza, B. Davis, C. Azzarri, K. Covarrubias, L. Tasciotti and G.
Anríquez. 2008. The impact of rising food prices on the poor. ESA
Working Paper 08-07. Rome, FAO (available at ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/
fao/011/aj284e/aj284e00.pdf).
1

benefit from higher prices, which, other things being equal,
will tend to increase their income. Since many farmers are
poor, higher prices could help to alleviate poverty and
improve food security. However, it must also be kept in mind
that farmers with more surplus production to sell will benefit
more from high prices than farmers who have only a small
surplus to sell. Further, in most (but not all) contexts, farmers
with more land tend to be better off than farmers with only
a little land, so it may be that poorer farmers will not receive
the bulk of the benefits from higher food prices. Overall
beneficial impacts of higher food prices on poverty are more
likely in countries with a relatively equal distribution of land.
Another potentially important effect of food prices on
poverty and food security operates through labour markets
and wages. Higher food prices stimulate demand for
unskilled labour to work on farms, which might result in an
increase in rural wages in the long run. This would benefit
households that are dependent on wage labour for their
income (who are usually very poor). The evidence in this
regard is inconclusive, however, and depends on the
importance of agriculture in the overall economy and how
many years the adjustments in wages take.9 The labourmarket channel is worthy of more study, as there is scant
information available concerning its effects on poverty and
food security.

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

15

Recent trends in world food commodity prices: costs and benefits

Given these considerations, what does the evidence show
about the impact of high prices on poverty? The average
income of net food buyers is higher than that of net food
sellers in most developing countries, and thus high food
prices would transfer income from higher-income people to
those with lower income.10 But this conclusion results from
dividing the population into just two groups; studies that use
a more detailed disaggregation nearly always show that the
poorest 20 percent of the population are net food buyers,
with surplus-producing farmers somewhere in the middle of
the income distribution. For example, higher food prices
increased poverty in seven of nine countries studied, with
Peru and Viet Nam being the only exceptions.11 Viet Nam is a
substantial rice exporter with relatively equitable land
distribution; as a result it has many households that produce
a surplus of rice but that are still relatively poor. In Peru, the
beneficial impact was very small. In all other countries in the
sample (Bolivia, Cambodia, Madagascar, Malawi, Nicaragua,
Pakistan and Zambia), higher prices increased poverty, even
after taking account of increased labour demand. Another
study reached similar conclusions – the poor were hurt by
higher prices in all countries studied (Albania, Bangladesh,
Ghana, Guatemala, Malawi, Nepal, Nicaragua, Pakistan,
Panama, Tajikistan and Viet Nam), with the exception of rural
dwellers in Viet Nam.12 This study did not examine labourmarket effects, but did incorporate supply and demand
responses, and found that high prices still hurt the poor.

Higher prices also increased poverty in Guatemala,
Honduras, Nicaragua and Peru.13 A review of a large number
of studies pertaining to rice (including Indonesia, the
Philippines and Thailand) found that the poorest quintile of
the population is nearly always a net purchaser of rice.14
Taken together, these studies show that the poorest
20 percent of the population are net food sellers only in
unusual circumstances.15
Different types of studies provide further support for the
idea that high food prices hurt the poor, and in more ways
than just pushing them below the poverty line. Generally
speaking, energy intake is less affected than dietary diversity
and consumption of protein and micronutrients. As one
example, when rice prices increased in Indonesia during the
Asian financial crisis in the late 1990s, households reduced
purchases of more nutritious foods such as eggs and green
leafy vegetables in order to continue to buy rice.16 This led to
a measurable decline in blood haemoglobin levels in young
children (and in their mothers), thus increasing the
probability of developmental damage. In addition, mothers
in poor families responded by reducing their caloric intake in
order to feed their children better, leading to an increase in
maternal wasting. A negative correlation between rice prices
and nutritional status has also been observed in
Bangladesh.17 Height for age scores among children under
three years old in El Salvador declined during the 2006–08
food crisis, although the effects were mitigated to some

BOX 4

Forests and food security

Global forest area is around 4 billion hectares, and still
represents about 30 percent of the total terrestrial surface
of our planet.1 It is well known that forests provide many
key environmental services, such as water management,
conservation of biodiversity and serving as a carbon sink
to mitigate global warming. In addition, forests play an
important role in the food security of one billion of the
poorest people on the planet by providing food or cash
income through a wide range of products such as wild
yams, bush meat, edible insects, fruits, leaves,
mushrooms, nuts, honey and medicinal products. Forests
also provide many non-food raw materials such as
bamboo, rattan, palm fibres and resins that can be used
for building shelter or sold at local markets, as well as
fodder for livestock.2
The people who depend on forests for their food
security are often very vulnerable to higher food prices
because they purchase most of their food on markets.
Higher food prices for these “hunters and gatherers”
mean that they have to collect more out of the forests

16

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

either for sale at local markets (in order to obtain
sufficient cash to buy the more expensive food), or to
exchange via barter. Higher food prices can thus have a
direct impact on forest quality, conservation and the
survival of key forest species (mainly fauna and medicinal
plants).
For these people, farming is not an option, as they do
not own or have access to farmland. In view of concerns
about climate change and biodiversity losses, clearing
more forests is not an attractive alternative either. Thus,
sustainable forest management is critical for their food
security. Forests will increasingly need to be managed not
only for their timber production potential, but also to
produce a larger and sustainable supply of edible nonwood forest products, as well as to enhance the many
services forests and trees provide to the agriculture sector.

1
2

FAO. 2010. Global Forest Resources Assessment 2010. Rome.
For further information, see http://www.fao.org/forestry/nwfp/en/.

Recent trends in world food commodity prices: costs and benefits

BOX 5

Why are there now so many concerns about high prices, after years of concern
about low prices?
Before the recent world food and financial crises, many
observers complained that low world food prices were a
problem for poor people in developing countries. More
recently, however, after the surge in food prices, most
analyses claim that higher food prices increase poverty. How
can high prices and low prices both be bad for poverty?1
One possible way to reconcile these contrasting views on
high and low prices would be to distinguish between the
long-run and the short-run effects of prices. In the short run,
higher prices increase poverty because the poorest
20 percent of the population in most countries are net food
buyers. But, if public and private long-term investment
increase as a result of higher food prices, this increased
investment might raise productivity and contribute to
economic growth and poverty alleviation. However, such a
beneficial outcome will not arise from a short-term supply
response that is due to increased use of labour and raw
material inputs such as fertilizer and pesticides.
Another issue to consider is that many of the gains from
higher world prices would go to large landowners in uppermiddle-income exporting countries – but these farmers are
not poor. Thus, even if developing countries gain from
higher prices, this does not mean that poverty will be
reduced – a more disaggregated analysis that examines the
impacts on land values and wages in specific countries is
required as well as a careful disaggregation of expenditure
patterns by income class.
It is also important to realize that the availability and
analysis of household survey data has increased substantially
in the past few years and this is responsible for some of the
shift in perspective surrounding high and low prices.
Furthermore, some of the concern over high and low prices

extent for families with access to remittances from family
members overseas.18 Weight for age did not decrease,
suggesting that there was a decrease in consumption of key
nutrients but not in energy intake. In some situations,
though, even energy intake may decline, in addition to
dietary diversity.19
Furthermore, high food prices seem to have a
disproportionate negative impact on female-headed
households, for two reasons.20 First, these households tend
to have less access to land and other resources, often
because of customary laws and social discrimination; as a
result, they are less likely to be net sellers of food. Second,
these households also tend to be poorer, which means they
spend a larger share of their income on food and are more
affected by high prices.

is more accurately described as concern over price volatility;
sharp fluctuations in prices can be bad for both farmers and
consumers (see ‘Costs and benefits of volatile and
unpredictable prices’, below).
Some studies appear to support the idea that higher prices
have beneficial effects by showing that, for example,
agricultural trade liberalization would both reduce poverty
and raise world food prices. But a careful reading of some of
these studies2 shows a more nuanced picture. First, it is
increased access to protected markets that reduces poverty,
not higher world food prices.3 Second, higher world prices
do not necessarily mean higher domestic prices, and it is the
latter that affects poverty rates. Thus, a reduction in import
barriers would lower domestic prices and raise world prices
at the same time (through increased demand for imports).
The lower domestic prices would reduce poverty, even
though world prices would have increased. In other words,
higher world agricultural prices and reduced poverty are two
separate outcomes of trade liberalization – high food prices
do not reduce poverty.
D. Rodrik. 2008. Food prices and poverty? Confusion or obfuscation?
(available at http://rodrik.typepad.com/dani_rodriks_weblog/2008/05/foodprices-and.html); J. Swinnen. 2010. The right price of food: reflections on
the political economy of policy analysis and communication. LICOS
Discussion Paper 259. Leuven, Belgium, LICOS Centre for Institutions and
Economic Performance, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven.
2
See, for example, T.W. Hertel, R. Keeney, M. Ivanic and L.A. Winters.
2006. Distributional effects of WTO agricultural reforms in rich and poor
countries. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4060. Washington,
DC, The World Bank.
3
T.W. Hertel and W. Martin. 2008. Response to Dani Rodrik’s blog post
entitled ‘Food prices and poverty? Confusion or obfuscation?’ (available at
http://rodrik.typepad.com/dani_rodriks_weblog/2008/05/food-prices-and.
html).
1

In addition to affecting different types of households
differently, changes in food prices also affect different
household members differently. For example, women’s
participation in the labour force may increase substantially
during economic crises,21 such as when males migrate in
search of better employment.22 The resultant additional
workload places stress on the time they have available to
engage in household work and child care.23 The mortality of
infant girls also increases more than that of infant boys
during crises.24
While high food prices harm the poor in most cases, this is
not an argument for generalized price subsidies. Such subsidies
are often politically difficult to remove and can drain
government budgets of the funds needed for investment in
public goods such as agricultural research, rural roads,

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

17

Recent trends in world food commodity prices: costs and benefits

education, health and sanitation. Generalized price subsidies
are also generally regressive, in the sense that most of the
benefits are captured by the well-to-do, who, despite spending
a smaller proportion of their budget on food than do the poor,
spend more money on food in total than do the poor.
But if general subsidies are not the answer, what is the
best way to help mitigate the adverse effects of high food
prices? In the short term, one option is to target food safety
nets to the most vulnerable (see ‘Coping with price volatility
after the fact: targeted safety nets and emergency food
reserves’, pp. 39–41). Over the longer term, the best way to
lower food prices is to invest in agriculture; this will
sustainably increase yields, reduce input costs, increase
productivity and reduce food losses and waste. These

investments have the potential to make food more
affordable for consumers and more profitable for farmers,
and are the only way to manage food prices in a way that
benefits everyone. In this sense, the cure for high prices
may be high prices, provided that the high prices motivate
farmers to adopt improved technologies and national
governments and international donors to increase the
financial resources available for investment in agriculture
(see ‘Preventing price volatility in the long term: increasing
the productivity, sustainability and resilience of agriculture’,
pp. 42–3). Thus, while high prices make the problem of
food insecurity and poverty worse in the short run, they
also represent an opportunity for investment and growth
that can reduce food insecurity and poverty in the long run.

Costs and benefits of volatile and unpredictable prices
Key message
When prices fluctuate substantially, even if they are tolerable
on average, the short-term shocks make both smallholder
farmers and poor consumers vulnerable to long-term
poverty traps. In addition, smallholder farmers find it difficult
to invest when price changes are unpredictable.

In addition to the impacts of high or low food prices
discussed above, variability in food prices can also have
important effects even if average prices remain constant.
This might happen if fluctuations in food production become
more common or larger but average production remains the
same. This would lead to more frequent and larger price
changes, which might be predictable or unpredictable. If the
increased variability were largely predictable, this would
cause fewer problems than if the changes were
unpredictable. However, price changes are generally less
predictable than might be imagined. For example, even in
the case of seasonality, the classic example of predictable
food price changes, the month with the highest and lowest
prices may vary substantially from year to year.25
Furthermore, even perfectly predictable changes in prices can
cause problems for poor households that are unable to
borrow when prices are high and thus are unable to
‘smooth’ their consumption over time. Thus, in Asia, where
seasonal price changes are relatively more predictable than in
Africa, there is still widespread concern over the ability of
poor households to cope during the lean season immediately
before harvest, despite the fact that this lean season is very
predictable. Thus, although the focus in the rest of this

18

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

section is on price changes that are unpredictable,
predictable price changes can also impose significant costs
on the poor.
Before discussing some of the negative impacts of price
volatility, it may be helpful to point out that, at least in
theory and under certain circumstances, volatile prices might
actually benefit certain people, even if the price changes are
not predictable. For example, rich consumers who can buy
in bulk when food prices are low and then store the food
for later use are able to buy more food when prices are low
and less when prices are high, thus paying, on average, a
lower price for food. Another example would be those
people who can afford to buy the assets that poorer
households sell at very low prices when desperate for funds
or faced with natural disasters such as drought.26 In general,
however, the costs of unstable and unpredictable prices
would seem to far outweigh any benefits such as these,
especially for the poor and food-insecure.
Broadly speaking, unpredictable price movements have at
least four types of negative impact: poverty traps and
reduced farm-level investment at the microeconomic level;
macroeconomic impacts; and impacts on political processes
(see Table 1). This report focuses on the microeconomic,
household-level impacts.27

■■ Poverty traps
Increased price unpredictability will mean a greater
incidence of high prices, although there will also be a
greater incidence of low prices if the average price remains
the same. Nevertheless, there are situations in which periods
of high prices can cause effects on net food buyers that are

Recent trends in world food commodity prices: costs and benefits

Table 1

Impacts of price volatility
Channel

Who/what is affected?

Examples

Poverty traps

Consumers and farmers

Temporary coping mechanisms such as distress
asset sales or reduced intake of nutritious foods
leading to permanent effects

Reduced private farm-level investment

Farmers

Lower fertilizer use leading to lower productivity

Macroeconomic impacts

Volatile food prices reduce the ability of prices to
function as signals that guide resource allocation

Investment not directed to optimal sectors of the
economy, reducing economic growth

Political processes

Democratic institutions; long-term economic
growth

Food riots that damage investment climate;
subsidies that prevent investment in public goods

not reversed by periods of low prices. Similarly, periods of
low prices can have adverse effects on farm families that are
not reversed by periods of high prices. For example, if staple
food prices increase sharply during the first 1 000 days of a
child’s life, intake of more nutritious foods may be curtailed.
This can cause permanent reductions in the child’s health
and nutritional well-being, which can result in lower
productivity during adulthood. Suboptimal nutrition can also
result in increased susceptibility to HIV-AIDS.28 In these
cases, a subsequent period of low prices will not undo the
damage. For net food sellers, periods of low prices will
temporarily reduce income, causing similar effects to those
experienced by net food buyers during periods of high
prices. In these cases, the effects will not be reversed by a
subsequent period of high prices.
Temporary reductions in disposable income due to price
shocks can also lead families to draw down on their capital.
For example, households may engage in distress sales of land
or livestock in order to maintain food intake in the face of an
economic shock, although this will depend on the situation –
in Burkina Faso, for example, during a severe drought
households cut back on consumption in preference to selling
livestock.29 Alternatively, families may make fewer visits to
the doctor, or remove children from school in order to save
on school fees. In Burkina Faso school enrolment is
negatively affected by shocks such as drought, and a shock
to cocoa prices led to a similar decline in Côte d’Ivoire.30 In
Nicaragua, sick children in areas affected by Hurricane Mitch
in 1998 made fewer visits to the doctor than children in
areas not touched by the storm.31 These responses may
result in a loss of human capital in the affected households.
Such episodes can result in poverty traps, whereby a onetime shock has permanent effects. Poverty traps can be
caused by any of a wide range of factors – natural disasters
such as hurricanes or droughts, an economic slowdown or
adverse price shocks. Regardless of the ultimate cause, any
reduction in the purchasing power of the poor can have
similar effects.
During Zimbabwe’s drought in the mid-1990s, young
children living in the poorest households suffered a

substantial reduction in growth rate, and these children
remained shorter than would otherwise be expected several
years later.32 These effects are particularly worrisome because
a large body of literature suggests that stunting is associated
with reduced cognitive skills and slower progress in school as
a child, as well as reduced earnings as an adult.33 In
Indonesia, lower rainfall in the year of birth significantly
reduced attained adult height of women, their number of
years of schooling as well as their adult earnings and led to
poorer adult health.34 There is evidence of such poverty traps
due to drought in Ethiopia and a hurricane in Honduras.35
What all of these studies have in common is that they show
how a one-time shock can have permanent effects.

■■ Reduced farm-level investment
The second type of negative impact of unpredictable prices
relates to farm-level investment decisions in developing
country settings where credit markets do not function well
and income is highly variable due to fluctuating weather
conditions or volatile prices. If farmers cannot obtain credit
when they need it, they will be reluctant to make productive
investments,36 especially those that tie up capital for extended
periods of time. This may happen even when prices are stable,
but price volatility will exacerbate this effect. For example, in
India, farmers underinvest in bullocks due to volatility in
income.37 Other fundamental decisions, such as choice of
crop, also may be affected by price volatility; for example,
poor farmers in the Punjab region of Pakistan switched from
growing Basmati rice, which is relatively profitable, to growing
livestock fodder in an effort to avoid price (and yield) risk.38
And even investments in fertilizer use, which offer returns
over a relatively short period of time, seem to be negatively
affected in some situations; for example, in Ethiopia farmers
were reluctant to invest in fertilizer for fear that they would
be hit by an economic shock.39
Because poor smallholder farmers are afraid that an
adverse price shock might lead them into the type of poverty
trap discussed above, they may be reluctant to adopt
technologies that provide greater long-run returns. Thus,

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

19

Recent trends in world food commodity prices: costs and benefits

they adopt a low-risk, low-return strategy that may be
optimal given their aversion to risk (which is due at least
partially to their poverty), but slows down the long-term
development process. Similarly, because much investment is
irreversible or involves sunk costs, investors will tend to
reduce investment in an environment of highly unpredictable
prices.

■■ Price volatility for staple foods in developing
countries is particularly harmful
Unstable prices for staple foods are likely to have larger
negative effects than unstable prices for other agricultural
commodities because staple foods are important for both
poor farmers and poor consumers. On the consumer side,
staple foods account for a large share of the expenditures of
the poor. On the producer side, they are the most widely
planted crops in developing countries, especially on
smallholdings.
Typical staple foods include rice, wheat, maize, millet,
cassava and potatoes, but there may be other crops that are
considered staples as well (e.g. onions in India, chilli peppers
in Indonesia). The share of these spices in household budgets
is much smaller than that of cereals and root crops but price
changes can be much larger, resulting in a large impact on
disposable income. For most cash crops (e.g. coffee, cocoa),
on the other hand, unstable prices have little impact on
consumers in developing countries. While perennial crops
such as oil palm are food commodities, the budget share of

20

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

these commodities is much smaller than that of staple foods.
This is not to say that volatility of prices for these crops is
unimportant for the welfare of the poor, only that it is
probably less important than volatility of prices for staple
foods.
Unstable prices for staple foods are also likely to have
greater effects in very-low-income countries than in higherincome countries and in poor households than in better-off
households along all four of the dimensions in Table 1. There
are two key reasons for this. First, in poor countries food
accounts for a larger share of consumer spending, farm
production and the macroeconomy and hence has more
impact on political processes than in rich countries. Second,
the poor have fewer assets than the rich, and are thus less
able to avoid or cope with price volatility. The corollary is
that, as economies grow and develop, stable food prices
become less and less important for investment and growth:
consumers diversify their diets, producers shift into highervalue crops, and as families move off the farm the
macroeconomy becomes more diversified.
But the fact that the costs of unstable prices are greater
than the benefits does not necessarily imply that instability
should be reduced. Before making this assertion, the costs of
unstable and unpredictable prices must be compared with
the costs of reducing that instability or of mitigating its
impacts. Such a comparison of costs is of paramount
importance when analysing the policy options discussed
under ‘Policy options to address price volatility and high
prices’, pp. 32–43.

Lessons from the world food crisis of 2006–08

T

here has been substantial discussion of what
happened (and why) on world food markets
between 2006 and 2008 (and more recently, in 2010
and 2011). The OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook provides a
review of these events.40 But the degree to which world price
movements are transmitted to domestic prices is a critical
issue, because neither farmers nor consumers interact directly
with world markets. In other words, the impacts of world
prices (in terms of both levels and volatility) on poverty and
food security are mediated through the price transmission
mechanism. This section of the report focuses on what
happened to prices on domestic markets during the world
food crisis of 2006–08.

■■ How have domestic prices for staple foods
changed since 2006?

Key message
Domestic food prices increased substantially in most
countries during the world food crisis; the exceptions
were some large countries that were able to insulate
themselves from world markets. But trade insulation
increased prices and volatility in international
markets, making domestic price increases in small
import-dependent countries larger than they
otherwise would have been.

markets during the crisis.41 While transmission is often
weak in normal times, transmission was stronger during
the world food crisis.42
Using annual averages, in 2008 domestic prices
(adjusted for inflation) in the same sample of countries as
used in Figure 5 were on average 28, 26 and 26 percent
higher for rice, wheat and maize, respectively, than in
2007. Although much less than the changes experienced
on world markets, these increases would have had a
substantial impact on the purchasing power of the poor. In
countries such as Bangladesh, Malawi and Viet Nam, the
poor often spend 35 percent or more of their income on
staple foods; since total food is about 70 percent of total
expenditures for the bottom quintile (see Figure 4, p. 14)
staple foods thus account for about half of total food
expenditures for the poorest 20 percent of the population.
Thus, in 2008, poor consumers who did not produce

FIGURE 5

Domestic prices for rice, wheat and maize increased
substantially during the crisis
Index (January 2007 = 100)
160
140
120
100
80

The world witnessed large increases in the prices of rice,
wheat and maize on international markets during the food
crisis of 2006–08. In most cases, the surges in prices on
international markets led to substantial increases in domestic
prices, although domestic prices did not increase in some
countries (see ‘What is the impact of trade policies on price
transmission?’, pp. 22–4). By July 2008, domestic rice, wheat
and maize prices were each, on average across countries,
about 40 percent higher (after adjusting for inflation) than
they were in January 2007 (Figure 5). Other studies have also
reached the conclusion that there was substantial
transmission of prices from world markets to domestic

60
40
20
0
2007

2008

Rice

2009

Wheat

2010

Maize

Note: The graph shows average inflation-adjusted trends in domestic prices for rice,
wheat and maize across countries from January 2007 to December 2010. The domestic
price is set equal to 100 in January 2007 for all countries, and the index value for
subsequent months is equal to the average index value across all countries. The domestic
price indices for rice, wheat and maize include 42, 27 and 34 countries, respectively, and
include all countries for which data were available at the time of writing.
Source of raw data: FAO Global Information and Early Warning System.

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

21

Lessons from the world food crisis of 2006–08

FIGURE 6

Volatility of domestic prices for rice, wheat and maize
peaked in 2008
Average volatility of domestic prices (percent)

■■ What is the impact of trade policies on price
transmission?

Key message

10

Restrictive trade policies can protect domestic prices
from world market volatility but can also result in
increased volatility as a result of domestic supply shocks.
In many instances, unpredictable government policies
are a more important cause of domestic price volatility
than world market price fluctuations.

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2007

2008

Rice

2009

Wheat

2010

Maize

Note: Volatility of domestic prices is calculated as the standard deviation of the logarithm
of (Pt /Pt-1), using monthly data. Countries included are the same as those in Figure 5.
Source of raw data: FAO Global Information and Early Warning System.

staple foods experienced a decline in real income of
approximately 9 percent (equal to the budget share of
35 percent multiplied by the price increase of about
26 percent). Not surprisingly, the average volatility of
domestic prices also increased during the crisis, reaching a
peak for all three cereals in 2008 (Figure 6).
After the collapse of international cereal prices in the
second half of 2008, domestic prices eventually began to
decline in most countries. By the second quarter of 2010,
domestic prices (after adjusting for inflation) had largely
returned to January 2007 levels for wheat and maize.
Domestic rice prices remained at somewhat higher levels,
however, with prices on average 20 percent higher than in
January 2007. The pattern of changes in domestic prices
across cereals was similar to that on world markets, as world
rice prices increased the most between January 2007 and the
second quarter of 2010.
In the second half of 2010 and the first half of 2011,
however, world prices for wheat and maize doubled due to
wheat crop damage in the Russian Federation and a
subsequent export ban, as well as poor growing conditions
for the maize crop in the United States of America and a
weakening dollar. Notably, world rice prices were much more
stable during this period. Transmission of these shocks to
domestic markets varied from country to country, although it
is too early to draw general conclusions. The next section of
the report describes the conditions under which world price
shocks are transmitted to domestic economies, as well as
how trade can mitigate the impact of domestic supply
shocks on price volatility.

22

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

Price transmission from world markets to domestic markets is
affected by several factors, including transport costs, countries’
levels of self-sufficiency, exchange rates and domestic shocks.
But trade policy is perhaps the most fundamental determinant
of the extent to which world price shocks pass through to
domestic markets. Trade policy interventions were relatively
common in developing countries during the world food crisis,
with at least 55 countries using trade policy instruments to
mitigate the impacts of the world food crisis of 2006–08.43
In particular, the key factor that affects price transmission
is the degree to which the government determines the
volume of trade (either exports or imports), as opposed to
allowing the private sector to make the decision.
Government control might be applied formally, through a
fixed quota, or informally, through ad-hoc determination of
quotas that vary in response to external events. Export
quotas can reduce pass-through of high world prices to the
domestic economy, while import quotas can prevent the
pass-through of very low world prices.
For example, during the world food crisis of 2006–08,
domestic prices of rice and wheat were very stable in China,
India and Indonesia because of government controls on
exports of these crops (see Figure 7 for China).44 These
controls are in place even in normal times and were not
implemented specifically in response to the crisis. It is
important to note that while trade controls in China did
prevent transmission from world markets, China has
maintained a generally open trade policy in the sense that
domestic rice prices are at most times similar to those on
world markets – the government does not systematically
force domestic rice prices to be above or below world prices.
On the other hand, domestic prices of soybean in China
surged in 2007 and 2008, because the government does not
control trade in that commodity (Figure 8). In addition, China
imports a large share of the soybean it consumes, so export
restrictions would be irrelevant.
Of course, not all government trade controls lead to more
stable and predictable prices (Box 6). Malawi, for example,
arranged for exports of maize in 2007/08 and 2008/09, but
domestic supplies were not sufficient to support exports and

Lessons from the world food crisis of 2006–08

domestic prices surged. In 2005, Zambia did not correctly
anticipate the domestic supply of maize and was late in
issuing import licences. Once the licences were issued, there
was confusion about the level of import tariff to be applied,
with disagreements among branches of government. After
the issue of the tariff was clarified, new sanitary and
phytosanitary regulations were introduced, which created

FIGURE 7

Government control of trade in rice prevented high world
market prices from affecting domestic prices in China
during the 2006–08 food crisis
Inflation-adjusted price (2006 yuan/tonne)
7 000
6 000
5 000
4 000
3 000
2 000
1 000
0
2006

2007

Domestic prices

2008

World prices

Source: C. Fang. 2010. How China stabilized grain prices during the global price crisis.
In D. Dawe, ed. The rice crisis: markets, policies and food security. London, Earthscan
and Rome, FAO.

further uncertainty for private traders. The resultant delays
made it difficult to book transport at a reasonable cost,
because most available trucks in the region had already been
booked for other purposes. Finally, the tender for imports
was not finalized for several months after the government
had announced how much maize it would import. This
created uncertainty as to when the government imports
would arrive on the market.45 All of these factors created a
very uncertain environment for private-sector importers, who
as a result imported much less than they otherwise might
have. The net result was a severe price spike on domestic
markets in late 2005 and early 2006 (a 68 percent increase
in nine months), even though international prices were
stable (Figure 9). It would have been even worse had the
Zambian kwacha not appreciated substantially at this time.
There are many other similar examples.46
Even when controls on trade volumes do serve to stabilize
domestic prices, there are costs to such policies. In terms of
losses to the domestic economy, there are short-run
economic efficiency losses from not allowing domestic prices
to follow world price movements. In the short term, supply
response is impeded and there are losses in export revenue
(however, if farmers are also protected from price declines,
trade controls might augment supply response at other
times). In addition to the losses imposed on the domestic
economy, export restrictions also result in world prices being
higher and more volatile than they would otherwise have
been, imposing costs on other countries.
The other main tool of trade policy, import tariffs or
export taxes, in many cases will not impede transmission of

FIGURE 8

FIGURE 9

The Chinese government does not control trade in
soybean, and domestic prices follow world market prices

Market uncertainty caused by government interventions
in the domestic maize market caused the price of maize
in Zambia to spike in 2005–06, even though international
market prices were stable

Inflation-adjusted price (2006 yuan/tonne)
5 000

Inflation-adjusted price (2005 Zambian kwacha/kg)

4 500

1 200

4 000

1 000

3 500
3 000

800

2 500

600

2 000
1 500

400

1 000

200

500
0
2006

2007

Domestic prices

2008

World prices

Source: C. Fang. 2010. How China stabilized grain prices during the global price crisis.
In D. Dawe, ed. The rice crisis: markets, policies and food security. London, Earthscan
and Rome, FAO.

0

2004

2005

South Africa

2006

Zambia

Note: Prices for white maize from South Africa are used as a proxy for the world price,
because South Africa is the major source of white maize for the region.
Sources of raw data: FAO Global Information and Early Warning System and International
Monetary Fund.

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

23

Lessons from the world food crisis of 2006–08

BOX 6

Do export restrictions reduce or stabilize domestic prices?

In many cases, export taxes and restrictions do seem to
stabilize domestic prices. This is especially likely when the
restrictions have been in place for a long period of time, so
that enforcement mechanisms are developed. Argentina,
for example, has used export taxes on wheat for many
years and did not experience the same spikes in domestic
prices as were observed on world markets in 2007 and
2010 (see figure). An export tax would not stabilize prices,
however, unless it increased as world prices increased, or
Export controls protected domestic prices for wheat
in Argentina from the spikes seen on the world
market in 2007 and 2010
Inflation-adjusted price (2005 Argentine pesos/tonne)
1 200
1 000
800
600
400
200
0
2007

2008

World

2009

2010

Argentina

Notes: World prices are for United States hard red winter wheat, ordinary protein,
free-on-board, United States Gulf. Domestic prices are for wholesale hard wheat, Cordoba.
Sources of raw data: FAO Global Information and Early Warning System, International
Grain Council, International Monetary Fund.

world price shocks to domestic markets unless the tariff/tax
is varied in response to changes in world prices. A constant
import tariff will raise the domestic price of food (and an
export tax will lower it), but if the private sector is allowed
to choose the amount they import at a given tariff, changes
in world prices will often be completely transmitted to
domestic prices until world prices or the tariff get so high
that there are no more imports.
While trade controls may impede price transmission
from volatile international markets, there are also
disadvantages to such policies. For example, controls can
increase price volatility due to domestic supply shocks (see
‘What is the impact of self-sufficiency on price volatility?’).
Higher domestic prices, in most cases, also tend to increase
the level of poverty (see ‘Costs and benefits of high and
low food prices’, pp. 13–18).

24

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

were so high that it eliminated all exports. Thus, in
addition to export taxes, Argentina also used quantitative
controls on wheat trade during 2007,1 which reduced the
magnitude of the spike on domestic markets.
As is evident from the figure, however, the increased
stability came at the cost of consistently lower prices for
farmers, which reduced production incentives.
Furthermore, while prices were stabilized for farmers, the
controls were much less effective in stabilizing prices for
consumers. Wheat accounts for only about 10 percent of
the cost of bread, which means that even giving wheat
free to millers and bakers would reduce the cost of
producing bread by just 10 percent.2
Not all countries with export controls are able to
successfully stabilize domestic prices, however. Viet Nam,
for example, restricted rice exports in the early months of
2008. Even though domestic supplies were more than
enough to feed the population, domestic retail prices
soared by 50 percent in only five weeks in April/May 2008.
Government policies such as export taxes also changed
frequently, adding to uncertainty and risk for traders later
in the year after prices had declined on world markets.
Indeed, domestic prices increased by 20 percent in just two
weeks in the second half of August 2008, despite there
being little movement on world markets at that time.3
J. Nogues. 2011. Agricultural export barriers and domestic prices:
Argentina during the last decade. Report prepared for FAO.
2
Ibid.
3
P. Hoang Ngan. 2010. The Vietnamese rice industry during the global
food crisis. In D. Dawe, ed. The rice crisis: markets, policies and food
security. London, Earthscan and Rome, FAO.
1

■■ What is the impact of exchange rates on world
prices and price transmission?
Exchange rate movements have two distinct, important
effects. First, changes in exchange rates cause changes in
world prices denominated in US dollars. For example, a
depreciation of the US dollar against other currencies means
that the world price of a commodity denominated in US
dollars declines in terms of those other currencies. The lower
price in currencies other than US dollars increases demand and
reduces supply from those countries, both of which contribute
to an increase in the price denominated in US dollars.
Second, changes in exchange rates can offset changes in US
dollar prices on world markets, helping to reduce transmission
of price changes to domestic markets. This did not eliminate
transmission of world price shocks to domestic prices during

Lessons from the world food crisis of 2006–08

FIGURE 10

Appreciation of the CFA franc against the US dollar
between 2003 and 2010 meant that the increase
in world rice prices was less in CFA franc terms than
in US dollar terms
Nominal price index (2003 = 100)
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
2003

2004

2005

2006

US dollars

2007

2008

2009

2010

CFA francs

Note: Nominal prices are used instead of real prices in order to isolate the impact of
exchange rate movements from the impact of deflating with two different price indices.
Sources of raw data: FAO, International Monetary Fund.

the food crisis of 2006–08 simply because world price shocks
were so large. Nevertheless, the impact of exchange rate
changes should not be ignored. For example, between January
2003 and December 2010 the world price of rice increased by
169 percent in nominal US dollar terms but by just 116 percent
in nominal CFA (Communauté Financière Africaine) franc
terms. The difference was due to the appreciation of the euro,
to which the CFA franc is linked, vis-à-vis the US dollar.47 Thus,
even in the absence of any domestic commodity policies, much
less of the world price increase was transmitted to western
Africa than would have been expected given trends in the
world price in US dollars (Figure 10). In some circumstances,
the influence of exchange rates can be crucial: from January
2006 to November 2007, a span of nearly two years, world
rice prices increased by 25 percent in nominal US dollar terms,
but by just 3 percent in nominal CFA franc terms.

■■ What is the impact of self-sufficiency on price
volatility?

Key message
A food security strategy that relies on a combination of
increased productivity and general openness to trade
will be more effective than a strategy that relies
primarily on the closure of borders.

At first glance, it might seem obvious that a country that is
highly dependent on imports would be more likely to suffer
large domestic price increases in the face of large world price

increases than would a country that is self-sufficient or an
exporter. In the absence of transport costs or government
intervention, however, world price increases pass through to
domestic prices directly for importers, exporters and selfsufficient countries alike. This is because private traders
would be free to move supplies from domestic markets to
world markets and vice versa until prices are equal across
markets. Indeed, even exporting countries experience
domestic price increases when world prices increase. For
example, domestic prices for rice in Thailand increased
sharply in 2008, because Thailand does not place
quantitative restrictions on private-sector rice exports.48
Thus, being close to self-sufficient can reduce vulnerability
to world price shocks, but only because it gives countries the
option to place controls on international trade without
suffering large domestic price increases. The closer a country
is to self-sufficiency, the less its domestic prices are affected
by world market prices, because under those conditions any
increase in the world price is likely to make private imports
unprofitable. This assumes that exports will not be allowed or
will not be profitable (e.g. due to quality problems); if they
are allowed or are profitable, world prices will be transmitted
to domestic prices. For a country that is heavily dependent on
imports, however, there is more potential for domestic prices
to increase, because the high import dependence most likely
indicates that the cost of domestic production is high.
On the other hand, it is important to realize that price
volatility can originate from either international or domestic
shocks.49 When a country is self-sufficient (because imports
are not profitable due to trade barriers, tariffs or high
transport costs), trade is not available to smooth domestic
supply disturbances. This may exacerbate price volatility
caused by fluctuations in agricultural output due to the
vagaries of the weather. In such cases, domestic buffer
stocks can serve as a substitute for international trade: stocks
can be released when domestic production is low, and built
up when there is a bumper crop.
Some countries have used buffer stocks effectively to
stabilize domestic prices, but many countries have not.
In addition, the costs to holding these stocks can be
substantial. For example, in the case of Bangladesh, it would
be cheaper in most cases to use imports to reduce price
volatility than it would to store rice.50 Money invested in
holding stocks has an opportunity cost in terms of key
investments in agricultural research, rural roads and other
public goods that are essential for a healthy agriculture
sector and long-term economic growth (see ‘Costs and
benefits of volatile and unpredictable prices’, pp. 18–20).
Indeed, many governments realize the expenses involved and
tend to reduce stock levels if prices are relatively stable for
several years. Thus, trade should remain an integral
component of a sensible food-security strategy.
It is also important to distinguish between self-sufficiency
achieved through trade restrictions and that achieved
through a competitive agriculture sector. Import restrictions

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

25

Lessons from the world food crisis of 2006–08

can allow a country to achieve self-sufficiency, but it is much
harder to move towards self-sufficiency through productive
investment that makes the agriculture sector competitive on
world markets. But the latter should be the real goal,
because it is the only way to provide long-term benefits for
both farmers and consumers.
Bangladesh is an example of a country that has made
good progress in reducing undernourishment while
maintaining general openness to trade and increasing
productivity. The government allows private traders to import
rice at a generally low tariff, and domestic rice prices have
been roughly similar to those in neighbouring countries,
including major exporters such as India and Thailand, for the
past 20 years. At the same time, rice yields have grown
rapidly over the past 20 years through investment in improved
seeds and irrigation. Domestic prices for rice increased during
2007–08, but prices fell rapidly from the middle of 2008
because of a rapid increase in domestic production.
The experience of the Dominican Republic provides a
different example. The government uses quotas, minimum
support prices and other measures to influence domestic
prices for rice and increase self-sufficiency. Domestic prices
increased just 11 percent from 2007 to 2008 (in nominal
US dollars) while prices in neighbouring countries increased
by between 26 percent (Costa Rica) and 59 percent
(El Salvador). But the smaller percentage increase in prices
came at a cost, in the form of higher prices in more normal
times before and after the crisis; quotas restrict imports,
driving up domestic prices. Even during the crisis, prices for
rice in the Dominican Republic were at similar levels to those
in neighbouring countries (Figure 11). Thus, the policy of
restricting imports has brought more stability, but at the cost

FIGURE 11

Government measures adopted by the Dominican Republic
reduced the impact of the spike in rice prices in 2008,
but at the cost of higher prices before and after the crisis
Domestic rice price (US$/kg)
1.40
1.30
1.20
1.10
1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Nicaragua

Guatemala

Dominican Republic

Honduras

El Salvador

Panama

Costa Rica
Source of raw data: FAO Global Information and Early Warning System.

26

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

of higher prices at almost all times. And as explained under
‘Costs and benefits of high and low food prices’, higher
prices for staple foods increase poverty in most countries.
Furthermore, if a country has higher prices for staple foods
than do its neighbours it may lose competitiveness in labourintensive industries, as it will be forced to raise wages to
compensate for higher food prices. This might reduce
employment opportunities, cutting off a pathway out of
poverty through the non-farm sector. Thus, self-sufficiency
that is due to trade restrictions instead of higher productivity
has many negative side-effects. In sum, a food security
strategy that relies on a combination of increased productivity
and general openness to trade will be more effective in
enhancing food security and reducing poverty than would a
strategy that relies primarily on the closure of borders.

■■ Are traditional staples insulated from world
price movements?

Key message
Despite the price shocks on world markets, volatility of
domestic prices for traditional staples such as sorghum,
millet and cassava is greater than that for the traded
cereals (rice, wheat and maize).

Some observers have noted that consumers in countries such
as Ghana and Uganda who eat a wider variety of staple foods
are less vulnerable to price surges on international markets
than those who rely on major cereals. Thus, some have
suggested that the poor and food-insecure should rely more
on traditional starchy staples (such as cassava, millet and
sorghum) for which international markets are much smaller
and less well integrated with domestic markets and less on
the major cereals. What do domestic price movements during
the world food crisis tell us about these issues?
First, the prices of traditional staples typically increased
during the world food crisis – they were not isolated from these
events. This is exactly what would be expected if consumers
were to increase demand for traditional staples in response to
higher prices for the major cereals and producers were to
increase supply of the major cereals at the expense of traditional
staples. But even when the prices of traditional staples
increased, the price increases were nearly always less than the
increases in prices for major cereals, just as would be predicted
by economic theory. Across a sample of 32 commodity pairs
(one major cereal and one traditional staple in the same
African country), between 2006 and 2008 the prices of major
cereals increased by an average of 21 percent more than did
the prices of traditional staples. Furthermore, the pattern also
held for each of the 11 countries examined separately. Thus,
the pattern of larger price increases for the major cereals than
for the traditional staples was quite robust in Africa.

Lessons from the world food crisis of 2006–08

But, as noted earlier, reduced reliance on international
markets does not necessarily bring greater price stability.
Indeed, a comparison of volatility of domestic prices across
commodities for 20 African countries51 yields a striking
conclusion: price volatility was least for rice or wheat in every
one of the 20 countries between 2005 and 2010, despite the
fact that this was a period of tremendous instability on world
rice and wheat markets (Figure 12). Apparently, while rice
and wheat prices experienced one large upward spike
followed by a decline, domestic prices of traditional staples
experienced several spikes and declines during the period.
This is presumably because domestic supply shocks are a
significant source of price variability, especially in Africa where
much production is rainfed, not irrigated. Indeed, globally,
62, 31 and 20 percent of the rice, wheat and maize areas is
irrigated, compared with only 9, 5 and 0.1 percent of the
sorghum, millet and cassava areas.52 Further, much of the
production of traditional staples is for home consumption,
which means that the markets for these commodities are
small, residual markets and are thus subject to greater price
fluctuations. Finally, a lack of market information (relative to
that available for the traded cereals) may mean that
production of these traditional foods is more subject to
cyclical patterns, where a high price encourages
overproduction, which subsequently leads to low prices and
underproduction, and so on.
Volatility of the price for maize was often less than that
for the traditional staples, although this was not always the

case. This is probably because domestic prices for maize are
less well connected to international markets than is the case
for rice and wheat, which are largely imported. The lack of
connection is because most maize consumed in Africa is
white maize, which is different from the yellow maize that is
traded on world markets. This makes domestic prices more
vulnerable to domestic supply shocks, as is the case for
sorghum, millet and cassava.
To summarize, if international cereal prices surge, it makes
sense for consumers to switch to traditional staples in order to
reduce the impact on their household budget until prices of
major cereals return to more normal levels. Thus, consuming a
variety of staples provides a potential buffer against world price
shocks. But it appears that the prices of traditional staples are
more volatile than the prices of major cereals, not less.
Of course, the debate surrounding the relative advantages
and disadvantages of imported cereals and traditional staples
encompasses much more than just price volatility. For example,
different crops will generate different levels of profits. In
addition, if a farm household chooses to change the crops it
grows this might change the intrahousehold allocation of
labour, as well as income, as some crops are considered men’s
crops and others women’s crops. Consumption decisions can
also impact time allocation; greater reliance on foods that
require more time for processing and cooking increases
women’s energy expenditures and reduces the time available
for other productive activities, child care and needed rest.53 The
nutritional content of different foods is also of key importance.

FIGURE 12

Domestic prices for rice, wheat and maize were less volatile than those for traditional staples in Africa between 2005 and 2010
Domestic price volatility (percent)

16

10

Wheat

Maize

12

Maize

14

0

Benin

Ethiopia

Rice

Sorghum

Rice

4

Wheat

Cassava

6

2

Millet

8

Sorghum

18

Sorghum

Cassava

20

Mali

Mozambique

Nigeria

Sudan

Note: Volatility was calculated as the standard deviation of monthly inflation-adjusted price changes.
Source of raw data: FAO Global Information and Early Warning System.

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

27

Lessons from the world food crisis of 2006–08

■■ How did farmgate prices respond during the
world food crisis?

The magnitude of supply responses in developing countries
will be shaped by transmission of world prices not just to the
retail level, but also to the farm level. If farmgate prices do
not increase, there will be no supply response.
While there are many anecdotal stories of retail prices
increasing while farmgate prices did not, hard data on
farmgate prices are essential to address this issue in a
convincing manner. While these data are not as readily
available as data on consumer prices, there is some evidence
to draw upon. The percentage increases in farmgate prices
for rice, wheat and maize were very similar to those in
consumer prices in several Asian countries (Bangladesh,
China, Indonesia, Philippines, Thailand) between 2003 and
2008. 54 In the United Republic of Tanzania, farmgate prices
for maize followed a similar pattern to consumer prices from
2007 to 2008,55 and longer term data from Burkina Faso for
both white and yellow maize also show similar movements
at producer and consumer levels (Figure 13). Farmgate prices
for maize in Kenya also increased substantially during the
world food crisis.56 Based on this evidence (summarized in
Figure 14), it appears that farmgate prices usually increase
when consumer prices increase.
While general movements in farmgate and consumer
prices over time are often similar, gross marketing margins
(the difference between retail prices and farmgate prices) are
not always constant. These margins have a seasonal pattern,
with the margin being greater during the peak harvest
because grain harvested at that time must be stored for a
longer period of time before being sold than grain harvested
in the off-season. In addition, margins are likely to increase
at times when prices are less predictable, because less
predictability means greater risk for traders. This happened

Key message
Evidence suggests that, in countries where retail prices
increased during the world food crisis, farmgate prices
also increased. But the volatility of prices during the
crisis increased risks for farmers and will not promote
longer-term investment by smallholders.

FIGURE 13

Farmgate prices for white maize closely followed retail
prices in Burkina Faso from 2003 to 2010
Inflation-adjusted price (2008 CFA francs/kg)
250
230
210
190
170
150
130
110
90
70
50
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Producer

2008

2009

2010

Consumer

Sources of raw data: International Monetary Fund, Government of Burkina Faso.

FIGURE 14

Farmgate prices generally increased as retail prices increased between 2003 and 2008
Percentage increase
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Bangladesh
rice

Bangladesh
wheat

Burkina Faso
maize

Cambodia
rice

Farm prices

Indonesia
rice

Peru
rice

Retail prices

Note: Based on inflation-adjusted prices. Price changes for Bangladeshi wheat are from 2003 to 2006 and for Tanzanian maize are from 2007 to 2008.
Sources of raw data: National statistical agencies.

28

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

Tanzania
maize

Lessons from the world food crisis of 2006–08

to rice marketing margins in both Thailand and the
Philippines in 2008: farmgate prices increased substantially,
but not by as much as wholesale and retail prices.
Indeed, many traders lost money during the world food
crisis.57 Farmgate prices rose so fast that traders often could
obtain supplies only at a price higher than the price at which
they had agreed to sell to their clients. As a result they made
losses, many substantial. It is also possible that traders had
monopolistic power that they exploited to raise margins,
although it would be difficult to say how much of any
increase in margins was due to monopolistic behaviour and
how much was compensation for higher risk. Finally, trading
costs were also rising during the period of the world food
crisis due to higher fuel costs.

■■ Do fertilizer price increases cancel out farm
price increases?

Key message
Increases in fertilizer prices harmed producers, but in
many cases higher crop prices more than compensated
for the extra costs incurred. This led to a large cereal
supply response in many countries in 2008.

Between 2001 and 2008, world prices for nitrogen,
phosphorus and potassium fertilizers all increased by more
than world grain prices (Figure 15). The price of urea, a prime
source of nitrogen and one of the most widely used fertilizers,
more than quadrupled in real terms from 2001 to 2008. To
the extent that these higher world prices were passed on to
farmers, they reduced farm profitability and hence potential
supply response. However, the extent to which fertilizer prices
cancelled out farmgate price increases is probably less than
commonly believed.
In traditional production systems that use little fertilizer, often
the case for poor smallholder farmers, higher fertilizer prices
have little impact on profitability. However, even in intensive
production systems that use large quantities of fertilizer, the cost
of fertilizer used is much less than the gross value of the crop
produced, and it is the relative magnitude of these two
quantities that determines the net impact of fertilizer price on
profitability. For example, across a range of high-yielding Asian
irrigated rice systems in six countries, the value of fertilizer
applied was typically about 8 percent of the gross value of
production in 1999.58 This implies that a doubling of fertilizer
prices would raise production costs by 8 percent of the value of
production (assuming no change in fertilizer use), which in turn
means that an increase in output prices of just 8 percent would
maintain profitability at a constant level. Even a further doubling
(i.e. a four-fold increase in total, as happened on world urea

FIGURE 15

Between 2001 and 2008 world prices for nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium fertilizers increased by more than world
prices for rice, wheat and maize
Index (2001 = 100)
600

500

400

300

200

100

0
2001

2002

Urea

2003

2004

DAP

2005

Potash

2006

2007

Rice

2008

Wheat

2009

2010

Maize

Note: Index is based on inflation-adjusted prices. DAP = Diammonium phosphate.
Source of raw data: International Monetary Fund.

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

29

Lessons from the world food crisis of 2006–08

markets) would require just a 32 percent increase in output
prices to fully compensate for the increased cost. Of course, if
fertilizer prices increase substantially over the longer term and
the cost of fertilizer became closer to the gross value of
production, larger and larger increases in output prices would
be required to compensate.
This general pattern is evident in Table 2, which shows the
evolution of production costs and returns for winter–spring
rice in An Giang province in the Mekong River Delta of
Viet Nam. Between 2007 and 2008, fertilizer costs more
than doubled, seed costs nearly doubled, labour costs
increased substantially and yields fell, but a 57 percent
increase in paddy prices was enough to lead to an increase in
profits of 34 percent. Profits from rice production in

Bangladesh in 2007/08 more than doubled compared with
the previous year.59 Not surprisingly, they subsequently fell in
each of the next two years, although even in 2009/10 they
were comparable to those in 2005/06. In Kenya, the
combination of an increase of about 160 percent in fertilizer
prices coupled with a 77 percent increase in maize prices
from 2007 to 2008 led to more than a doubling of profits.60
However, the increase in profits is dependent upon
maintaining fertilizer use – if fertilizer use falls because
farmers cannot afford it, yields fall and profits may well
decline. This scenario would not occur if credit markets
functioned well, but in many cases they do not.
Figure 16 shows the percentage increase in crop prices
required to compensate fully for a doubling of fertilizer and

Table 2

Profitability of winter–spring paddy in An Giang province, Viet Nam, increased in 2007/08 despite large increases
in fertilizer and seed prices
Item

2007

Seed

2008

Percentage change

484

936

93

Fertilizer

3269

6691

105

Labour

3116

4765

53

Other costs

2928

2941

0

Yield (kg/ha)

6100

5792

–5

Paddy price (VND/kg)

2350

3700

57

Profit

4538

6097

34

Source: Adapted from P. Hoang Ngan. 2010. The Vietnamese rice industry during the global food crisis. In D. Dawe, ed. The rice crisis: markets, policies and food
security. London, Earthscan and Rome, FAO.
Notes: VND = Vietnamese dong. Costs and profits shown in thousands of Vietnamese dong per hectare.

FIGURE 16

Relatively small increases in crop prices can compensate for a doubling of fertilizer and fuel prices
Crop price increase (percent)
25
20
15
10
5
0
Nigeria
maize–cowpea intercrop
2008

Ecuador
potatoes
2007

USA
wheat
1998

India
rice
1995–2001

Bangladesh
lentil
2009

Note: Figure shows percentage increase in crop price that would be required to maintain profits if fertilizer and fuel costs doubled. The calculations assume that seed costs increase by
the same percentage as crop prices, because seed prices typically increase along with output prices and constitute an additional burden for farmers.
Sources of raw data: M. Ali and G. Vocke. 2002. How wheat production costs vary. In: Wheat Yearbook 2002. Washington, DC, United States Department of Agriculture;
A.O. Segun-Olasanmi and A.S. Bamire. 2010. Analysis of costs and returns to maize–cowpea intercrop production in Oyo state, Nigeria. Paper presented at the Joint Third African
Association of Agricultural Economists (AAAE) and 48th Agricultural Economists Association of South Africa (AEASA) Conference, Cape Town, South Africa, September 19–23, 2010;
R. Cavatassi, M. González-Flores, P. Winters, J. Andrade-Piedra, P. Espinosa and G. Thiele. 2011. Linking smallholders to the new agricultural economy: the case of the Plataformas de
Concertación in Ecuador. Journal of Development Studies (forthcoming); M.A. Rashid, M.K. Hassan and A.K.M. Harun-ur-Rashid. 2009. Domestic and international competitiveness
of production of selected crops in Bangladesh. Final Report CF No. 1/08. Dhaka, National Food Policy Capacity Strengthening Programme; B. Vinayakumar, N. Kollurmath, N. Karnool,
L.B. Kunnal, H. Basavaraj and V. Kulkarni. 2008. Cost of production of rice and maize in World Trade Organization era of Karnataka. Karnataka Journal of Agricultural Science, 21(2): 241–245.

30

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

Lessons from the world food crisis of 2006–08

fuel prices in a variety of production systems around the
world. (Costs of fuel and fertilizer commonly rise in tandem
because natural gas is a major input in the production of
urea fertilizer.) Highly mechanized systems, or those that rely
on pumping of groundwater, would be affected more
because of the importance of fuel costs. The effects would
be less in no-till systems that use surface irrigation water or
that are rainfed. Thus, the impact of changes in fertilizer and
fuel prices would vary across different types of production
system, but in many cases it would take only a small increase
in output prices to compensate for even a large increase in
fertilizer prices. In other words, an increase in the ratio of
fertilizer price to output price does not necessarily imply a
decline in profitability. Indeed, during the world food crisis, it
appears that supply response was quite substantial in a
number of developing countries.61 Farmers in developing
countries do respond to higher prices, in terms of increases
in both area planted and yield,62 although the response is
reduced when prices are unstable.63
Timing of price changes can also be important. In
Viet Nam in 2008, farmers planted the summer–autumn rice

crop when both rice and fertilizer prices were relatively high.
The high rice price contributed to an increase in area
planted, but by harvest time rice and fertilizer prices had
fallen sharply (in line with world prices). Unfortunately, the
farmers had to sell their output at the new lower price, but
did not benefit from the lower fertilizer prices (at least not
for that crop) because they had bought and applied fertilizer
before the prices dropped. On the other hand, the winter–
spring crop harvested earlier in 2008 benefited from a
substantial, unanticipated increase in rice prices, which led to
a sharp increase in profits (Table 2). Thus, timing issues can
cut both ways.
To summarize, farmgate prices and profits appeared to
increase in many cases during the world food crisis but the
increase was only temporary. The increase in volatility (see
Figure 6, p. 22), coupled with the fact that by the second
quarter of 2010 domestic prices in real terms had largely
returned to pre-crisis levels (Figure 5, p. 21), means that the
incentives for smallholder farmers to increase long-term
farm-level investment (as opposed to short-term supply
response) have been weak.

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

31

Policy options to address price volatility
and high prices

B

efore considering interventions to reduce and
manage domestic price volatility, it must be
recognized that some price volatility is an inherent
characteristic of agricultural commodity markets. In the
short term, because there is a mismatch between timing of
supply (which is seasonal) and timing of demand (which is
much less seasonal), agricultural commodities must be
stored, and storage will not be profitable unless prices vary
during the course of the year. Over the longer term, if the
increase in food production is not keeping pace with
demand growth, it is important that prices increase. This will
provide incentives for farmers to increase supply and for the
private sector to increase research and development, and
will provide signals for the public sector to increase spending
on public goods that support agricultural production and
markets.

Broadly speaking, interventions to reduce the costs
associated with price volatility can be divided into two
types. First, there are interventions that reduce price
volatility, such as improving market information (Box 7).
Second, there are interventions that accept price volatility
as given and attempt to cope with it. These coping
mechanisms can be either before (ex ante) or after (ex post)
the fact. Further, the interventions can occur at either the
international or the domestic level, and can be
implemented by either the public or the private sector.
Some interventions fit into more than one of these
categories. Use of domestic buffer stocks and trade
controls, for example, accept international price volatility as
given and try to cope with it after the fact. But, at the
domestic level, these interventions also try to reduce
domestic price volatility.

BOX 7

Improving market information systems to reduce price volatility

Information on the current situation and outlook for
global agriculture shapes expectations about future prices
and allows markets to function more efficiently.
Conversely, lack of accurate information on market
fundamentals may reduce efficiency and accentuate price
movements. Better information and analysis of global and
local markets and improved transparency could reduce
the incidence and magnitude of panic-driven price surges.
Recent events have revealed weaknesses in the capacity
of nations and international organizations to produce
consistent, accurate and timely agricultural market data
and analysis, especially in response to weather shocks
such as floods or droughts. Action is needed to increase
capacity to undertake more frequent and systematic
monitoring of the state of crops and to develop

mechanisms for improved short-run production forecasts
that are able to translate crop growth, meteorological and
remote sensing data into yield and production
expectations. Greater use could be made of satellite data
and geographic information systems and, in this context,
international coordination and exchange of technologies
and information could be enhanced.
Information on food stocks is an essential component
of a global food market information system, yet reliable
data on stocks of grains and oilseeds are often not
collected or, if collected, are not reported publicly. The
reasons for the lack of good stock data are multiple: some
countries no longer hold public stocks because the policy
measures that created them have been removed or
reformed; stocks can be very dispersed among farmers,
(Cont.)

32

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

Policy options to address price volatility and high prices

BOX 7 (Cont.)

traders and other actors and hence difficult to track; and
some information on stocks is commercially or politically
sensitive. Generally, international agencies estimate net
changes in stocks from data on production, consumption
and trade. As a result, it is not possible to have complete
confidence in world food stock estimates. International
cooperation could redress this situation and ensure that
reliable information on global stocks becomes widely
available. This would, in turn, better inform market
participants and help avoid panic-induced price surges
resulting from misinformation.
Monitoring food prices, on both cash and futures
markets, is another essential component of a food market
monitoring system. Assessing changes in oil prices and
analysing their impact on food markets is also important.
Better information about domestic price movements is
necessary to understand how international price changes
affect domestic markets in developing countries. Such
information is important for early warning systems, such
as the FAO Global Information and Early Warning System
and WFP’s Vulnerability Analysis and Mapping Unit. It is
also crucial for policy-making and designing effective risk
management instruments for developing countries.
For developing countries, enhanced market information
and early warning systems would enable both
governments and the private sector to plan ahead.
Governments would be able to assess needs more
accurately, make budgetary provision for producer and
consumer safety nets and better position emergency
food-security reserves. Improved market information and
analysis could reduce uncertainties and help producers,
traders and consumers to make better decisions.
Over the last decade a great deal of baseline information
on food security vulnerability has been developed. WFP
support to national food-security monitoring systems
already provides a monitoring and decision-support tool to

There are some basic principles that should be considered
when designing interventions. First, although it is difficult to
quantify the costs and benefits of various policies, it is
important that interventions be designed with costeffectiveness in mind whenever possible. This is important to
ensure that public funds are available for critical investments
in agricultural research, roads, education and health.
Second, it must be recognized that the private sector will
play a critical and dominant role in an efficient marketing
system, defined as one that provides higher prices for
farmers and lower prices for consumers. There are no
examples of efficient marketing systems for food
commodities that are dominated by the public sector.
Third, while government intervention into food markets
will likely continue into the future, these interventions should

help governments manage and respond to risk related to
price, weather or other hazards. At a regional level, a few
successful efforts, such as the Famine Early Warning System
Network, have increased the availability of information to
governments and market participants. The reliability and
timeliness of such early warning systems need to be
improved, and capacity to develop and utilize them should
be strengthened at both the national and the regional
levels. The focus should be on countries that are particularly
vulnerable to price shocks and food emergencies.
The experience of the 2006–08 food price crisis and the
current high price volatility in many international food
markets have exposed weaknesses in relation not only to
the provision of market information at the global level but
also to the coordination of policy responses to food price
volatility. There is a need to ensure better preparedness and
more rapid and consistent policy responses in times of
crisis. Building on and complementing existing systems,
improvements in global market information and policy
guidance could be achieved through a collaborative food
information and policy initiative currently being discussed
by a number of international organizations: the Agricultural
Market Information System (AMIS). Such an initiative
would improve data reliability, timeliness and frequency, as
well as enhance policy coordination in times of crisis.
AMIS could be built on the model of the Joint Oil Data
Initiative, launched in 2000 to improve information about
oil markets. However, it would have the additional
functions of issuing global food price surge alerts and
promoting policy coherence. AMIS would involve the
major food producing, exporting and importing countries.
It would also involve a secretariat composed of
international organizations with the capacity to collect,
analyse and disseminate information on a regular basis
regarding the food situation and outlook as well as to
develop food policies.

become more predictable and take into account their impact
on the behaviour of the private sector. Erratic government
interventions not only raise costs for the private sector,
impeding its development, but also often increase price
volatility. There are several examples of government
interventions that have discouraged the private sector from
arranging imports and resulted in a surge in domestic
prices.64
Fourth, aside from the general principles listed above,
it must be recognized that each country is unique in many
respects. In order to take account of different situations,
each country should analyse its own circumstances and
engage in policies appropriate to those circumstances.
Country-specific experimentation along these lines should be
encouraged.

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

33

Policy options to address price volatility and high prices

Preventing domestic price volatility
in the short term: trade policies and buffer stocks
Key message
Government policies that are more predictable and that
promote participation by the private sector in trade will
generally decrease price volatility. More predictability
for private traders will decrease risk, leading to
narrower margins, lower prices for consumers and
higher prices for farmers.

Reducing domestic price volatility has historically been a
concern for many countries, both developed and developing.
In order to achieve their objectives, developing countries have
typically used a combination of trade controls and buffer stocks.
As noted earlier, price volatility may originate from either
domestic or international markets. Thus, a comprehensive policy
on volatility cannot focus on international price shocks to the
exclusion of domestic supply disruptions. In general, trade is the
most cost-effective way to stabilize domestic prices in the face
of shocks to domestic supply. For trade to be most effective,
however, a solid market information system is of prime
importance, so that imports can be arranged (whether by the
government or the private sector) in a timely fashion. If there will
be significant lags in the arrival of imports or access to emergency
humanitarian reserves, buffer stocks may have a role to play.
In the case of shocks emanating from world markets,
countries have two basic choices (or combinations thereof):
•
Accept the price volatility and cope with it through a
combination of risk management instruments and safety
nets.
•
Use a combination of trade controls and buffer stocks to
reduce price transmission from international markets.
Both of these options have costs. The costs of price volatility
were described earlier in ‘Costs and benefits of volatile and
unpredictable prices’, and can be substantial. On the other
hand, buffer stocks and trade controls also have costs. For
example, the interest costs of buffer stocks can be significant.
Furthermore, maintaining a buffer stock at a given level may
involve trading twice that volume annually in order to maintain
stock quality. These trades represent significant transaction
costs (or quality deterioration if the trades are not carried out).
Government interventions to stabilize domestic prices increase
world price volatility and hurt poorer and smaller countries that
are heavily reliant on food imports. If trade controls reduce
domestic prices, supply response will be lower than it otherwise

34

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

would have been. This can create serious problems if the
controls are sustained over time, because most observers
expect higher world food prices in the future, in which case
the world will need additional supplies.65
On balance, it is not easy to quantify whether the costs of
price volatility are greater or less than the costs of interventions
to prevent it, and the answer will surely be situation-specific. It
is possible, however, to offer some guidelines, informed by
both historical experience and theory, that would help to lower
the costs of government interventions.
Some rice-producing Asian countries have relied on a
combination of international trade, buffer stocks, import or
export monopolies and domestic procurement to stabilize
prices. These measures were often successful in achieving
their objectives and, in some cases, may have stimulated
economic growth as well (see Box 8). In Africa, the
experience with stabilization of the maize market has been
less successful, as interventions have often been
unpredictable and less supportive of a strong role for the
private sector in marketing activities. Private traders have had
to deal with uncertainties surrounding many important
factors, including:
•
the issuance of import and export licences;
•
the level of the tariff, and which groups of private
traders might be exempt from it;
•
the level of government imports and the price at which
they will be sold;
•
the enforcement of sanitary and phytosanitary
regulations; and
•
transport across national borders.
Taken together, these uncertainties raise market risk
significantly, discourage the private investment that is
essential for a well-functioning market and leave many
economies unnecessarily prone to food shortages.
Government policies must be relatively transparent and
predictable if the private sector is to play its roles in moving
supplies from surplus to deficit areas and in storing supplies
between harvest and the lean season. Furthermore, they
should also try to minimize costs as much as possible in order
to make sure that agricultural budgets are used primarily for
investments in research and other public goods that can
provide long-term solutions to price volatility.
Many government policies on food trade seem to stem
from a distrust of private traders. One key step that could be
taken in many countries is the establishment of regular,

Policy options to address price volatility and high prices

BOX 8

Rice price stabilization in Indonesia

Indonesia successfully stabilized domestic rice prices for
more than a quarter of a century from 1969 to 1996 (see
graph below). During that period, domestic prices were
roughly equal to world prices on average, but were
substantially less volatile. Stabilization was achieved
through a combination of international trade (usually
imports, but occasionally exports) and buffer stocks that
were procured and distributed depending on whether
production was in surplus or deficit.1 Although the
amount of rice that the government bought varied from
year to year with the size of the harvest, it was on
average less than 5 percent of domestic production. In
other words, the private sector was responsible for
marketing 95 percent of the rice crop. Furthermore,
nearly all of the government procurement was done
through traders, not directly from farmers.

A floor price was announced every year before the main
crop was planted, thus providing clear incentives to farmers
to adopt new technologies. The level of the floor price that
was announced took into account current inflation rates and
was adjusted up or down slightly depending on world price
movements, fertilizer prices and other factors. The level of
the floor price, after adjusting for inflation, was relatively
stable over time, providing stable long-term incentives for
investment in rice production. The overall benefits of the rice
price stabilization programme were substantial, although the
benefits fell over time as the importance of rice to the
economy declined with economic growth.2
C.P. Timmer.1996. Does BULOG stabilize rice prices in Indonesia?
Should it try? Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies, 32: 45–74.
2
C.P. Timmer. 2002. Agriculture and economic growth. In B. Gardner
and G.Rausser, eds. Handbook of agricultural economics. Vol. IIA,
pp. 1487–1546. Amsterdam, North-Holland.
1

Indonesia managed to stabilize its domestic price for rice from 1969 to 1996 through trade and buffer stocks

Inﬂation-adjusted price (1996 Indonesian rupiah/kg)
2 500

2 000

1 500

1 000

500

0
1969

1972

1975

1978

1981

1984

Domestic prices

1987

1990

1993

1996

World prices

Sources of raw data: Indonesian Bureau of Logistics (BULOG); International Monetary Fund.

formal, open lines of communication between the
government and the private sector. These could increase
transparency and might help to avoid crises by providing
advanced warning of impending problems that might harm
the food security of the poor.66
International trade has a key role to play in reducing domestic
price volatility, but the fact that World Trade Organization rules
on export barriers are much weaker than those on import
barriers is a severe obstacle to increasing trust in international
markets. Indeed, export restrictions have exacerbated price

volatility on international markets in recent years (see Box 9).
Net food importers need much stronger guarantees from their
trading partners if they are to rely on international trade as a
source of food. A ‘first best option’ would be a ban on export
restrictions, with countries addressing domestic food security
issues through direct and targeted support. However, it is
unlikely that a ban on export restrictions would be agreed or,
even if agreed, would be enforced during a food crisis. On the
other hand, reinforced rules, in particular in terms of
transparency, are both possible and useful.

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

35

Policy options to address price volatility and high prices

BOX 9

The world rice crisis

Price volatility on international markets can sometimes be
caused by domestic market intervention policies – the
world rice crisis of 2007/08 provides a good case study in
this regard.
The rice crisis was not caused by any problems in the
basic balance between production and consumption.
First, rice production kept pace with increases in demand
in the years before the crisis, and there were no major
supply shocks in 2007/08. Indeed, global rice production
reached new record highs for four straight years starting
in 2005. Second, reflecting the good production
outcomes, the stock-to-use ratio remained roughly
constant in the three years before the crisis – there was
no drawdown that would have made the market
vulnerable to small disruptions in production. Third,
despite some concerns that exporters did not want to sell
(perhaps in anticipation that prices would continue to
rise), there were supplies available on international
markets for importers – the volume of exports in the first
four months of 2008 was about 20 percent higher than in
the same period in 2007.
While fundamentals in the rice market were sound,
those for other food commodities did point to higher
prices. Increased demand for biofuel from maize and
oilseeds, and a nearly 4 percent decline in global wheat
production in 2006/07 (including a severe drought in
Australia, a leading wheat exporter), led to higher prices
in those markets. Higher prices for maize and wheat
probably led some consumers to shift from wheat to rice,
which would have placed some upward pressure on rice
prices. However, the size of the rice price increase went
well beyond what could be explained on the basis of such
substitution – it was ultimately government policies that
led to the crisis. Indeed, the price hike was faster and
stronger for rice than for cereals with less favourable
market conditions.
In addition to higher maize and wheat prices, rising oil
prices and a weak US dollar also contributed to higher
commodity prices in general. These factors created
concern in some countries that rice prices might increase
as well. Indeed, rice prices had been rising since 2003, but
the price increase during that time was relatively slow and
steady (and thus easy to manage). Beginning in October
2007, however, government policies in a number of
countries caused prices to increase rapidly. Large

36

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

producers of rice restricted supplies to the world market
in order to avoid shortages for their own consumers,
either completely banning exports or announcing
increasingly high minimum export prices. Governments of
rice-importing countries scrambled for supplies to stabilize
their own markets, often buying very large quantities and
paying above market prices. Others announced plans to
build up stocks during the crisis, further driving up
demand. As a result of these policies, prices on world
markets tripled between October 2007 and April 2008.
Even during the world food crisis of 1973–75, world rice
prices had never doubled within six months, much less
tripled.
While trade restrictions allowed some countries to
prevent transmission of the price surge on world markets
to their domestic prices, domestic stability was achieved
at the cost of destabilizing the world market. It is very
likely that the rice crisis would not have occurred if these
measures had not been taken. Thus, one lesson from the
rice price crisis is that disciplines of the World Trade
Organization need to be strengthened so that export
restrictions are used less frequently. Enforcement of any
such disciplines might, however, be difficult, as noted
earlier.
Making trade restrictions less harmful offers an
additional approach to stabilizing the world rice market.
An important step in this direction would be to make
government policies more predictable. While many
governments understandably want to maintain some
flexibility in response to sudden unforeseen events, some
policy changes could be avoided. Others might be
implemented according to pre-announced schedules or
criteria that determine when changes are phased in
automatically in response to external events; this would
make price changes more predictable.
The rice price crisis also demonstrates the need to
strengthen the role of the private sector in carrying out
trade, even if governments determine when trade takes
place. Private-sector traders are unlikely to pay abovemarket prices, and their smaller trade volumes are less
likely to move the market. Expanding the role of the
private sector is particularly important for the world rice
market, which is smaller than other world cereal markets
and can thus be influenced more easily by large
operations of governments.

Policy options to address price volatility and high prices

Coping with likely future price volatility:
risk management for smallholder farmers
and governments
Key message
Agricultural research and cost-effective irrigation are
urgently needed in order to reduce the production risk
facing farmers, especially smallholders. These types of
investments will reduce price volatility and will also
lower production costs per tonne, which will reduce
food prices.

Farmers face both production risks and price risks. A prudent
risk-management strategy must consider both sources of
risk, especially since one type of risk can offset the other in
some circumstances (e.g. a domestic supply shock can lead
to higher prices, so that reduced production is compensated
for by higher prices).
Adverse weather and pests and diseases reduce farm
income and result in more variable production. Climate
change will likely increase these types of risk in the future.
Many technologies, such as the introduction of disease- or
stress-resistant varieties or the construction of irrigation and
drainage systems, can reduce the risk to which farmers are
exposed. For example, submergence-tolerant rice is
spreading rapidly in parts of Asia where floods are frequent.
Another promising way to reduce the risk facing farmers is
through the use of improved small-scale storage
technologies that smallholder farmers and consumers can
afford.67 Such technologies would reduce post-harvest losses
and also provide a buffer against price shocks that might
reduce the potential for panic-driven surges in demand. Such
technologies are the most important way to reduce the risk
facing farmers and countries, and should be strongly
supported by both national governments and donors.
Market-based insurance mechanisms provide another way
to transfer risk and assist farmers in making production
decisions. It must be recognized, however, that any
commercially viable insurance when offered as a standalone
product will lower the average level of farm income in the
short term, as a private insurance company will not offer a
product if it consistently pays out more than it receives. Over
the longer term, however, the reduced risk faced by farmers
can encourage them to invest in more-profitable

technologies that raise their productivity and income.
For example, insurance when bundled with credit, inputs,
and other services can allow households to take prudent
risks knowing they will be protected if there is a disaster.
Governments can (and often do) provide subsidies for
insurance, but these programmes have typically been very
expensive to operate, even in developed countries. Subsidies
to such programmes need to be balanced against the costs
and benefits of expenditures on agricultural research and
irrigation.
Considerable effort and research are being invested in
developing ways to address the challenges of insuring
smallholders against production risks. One such innovation
is weather-index-based crop insurance. This pays out to
farmers whenever particular weather factors – rainfall or
temperature, for example – cross specific thresholds at
which they are likely to cause a significant fall in crop yields.
These factors are measured by weather stations or even
satellite technology. The advantage of this approach is that
insurers do not need to make field-level assessments, which
reduces administrative costs. In addition, farmers who have
such insurance do not have incentives to mismanage their
crop (a problem known as moral hazard) in order to receive
a payout, since the payout is based on an external
measurement rather than crop yield.
However, weather-index-based insurance requires a
number of conditions to be in place. First, the index chosen
must be strongly correlated with local yields, or else farmers
are not insuring themselves against the relevant risk (this is
known as basis risk). Second, there must be adequate
infrastructure, such as a network of local weather stations
and/or available remote-sensing options, reliable historical
data and an adequate legal and regulatory environment.
Third, farmers should have a clear understanding of how
such insurance works and should be able to pay for it.
Finally, for index insurance to be effective, it should be
linked to other financial services as part of a larger package
of risk management solutions.
The use of futures markets by smallholders in developing
countries to manage price risk seems more problematic at
present. Few developing countries have commodity
exchanges where farmers and other market participants can

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

37

Policy options to address price volatility and high prices

hedge against price fluctuations. Moreover, there are
substantial fixed costs of participation in such markets in
terms of knowledge and understanding, and it is less
profitable for a farmer to acquire such knowledge if her or
his farm is small. Even in the United States of America, only

3 percent of farms used futures contracts in 2008.68 In
general, it has proved extremely difficult to reach
smallholders in a cost-effective manner.
Governments face risks similar to those faced by farmers,
and some of the available instruments are similar as well.

BOX 10

What happens to the operations of the United Nations World Food Programme
– the largest purchaser of food for humanitarian purposes – when food prices rise?
Rising food prices affect the World Food Programme (WFP)
in two ways: they make it more expensive to purchase food
for the existing programmes to feed the hungry and they
increase the number of people needing food assistance.
The WFP business model is unique in the United Nations
System. It is funded entirely through voluntary donations
and receives no assessed contributions, core funding or
membership dues. As a result, and because of its
constitution, it is unable to hedge prices of commodities in
the market place in the way that a large private-sector
company might do.
Two factors are key drivers of WFP costs. The first is the
prices of food commodities themselves. WFP procures its
food commodities on spot markets. Thus, when the food
price crisis struck in 2007 WFP was fully exposed to the
effect of the increases. Every 10 percent increase in the cost
of the WFP food commodity basket adds around
US$200 million to the cost of feeding existing beneficiaries.
The second cost driver is transportation, which is linked
to fuel prices. Given the need for food to be transported to
some of the most remote areas of the world, including air
drops of food in the most difficult terrains, fuel prices are
significant determinants of WFP costs.
Between June 2007 and February 2008 the cost of
meeting the needs of WFP’s existing client load increased
by US$775 million.
The next dimension is securing resources for the needs of
those who have become newly dependent on food
assistance as a result of food price rises in their locality.
Between June 2007 and February 2008 WFP needed
US$186 million extra to expand interventions through
schools to about 4.8 million beneficiaries in 11 countries, to
distribute specialized foods to about 1.8 million
malnourished children and pregnant and lactating women,
extend public works programmes to over 4 million
beneficiaries so that they could put food on the table and
to introduce cash transfer and voucher programmes to
about 800 000 people in seven countries to enable them to
access available food in the marketplace.
Resource savings were achieved by changing commodities
in some food baskets, for example by substituting sorghum

38

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

for maize in parts of Africa. Even so, the overall additional
costs for WFP in 2008 were US$920 million.
The final challenge that arose for WFP in 2007 and
2008 was the actual procurement of food. As food
commodity markets tightened, WFP faced difficulties in
actually securing food and getting it to the right place at
the right time. On average, it takes 3–4 months between
securing food commodities and delivering them to where
they are needed. WFP procures food competitively and as
close as possible to the place where it is needed, taking
into account both the commodity cost and the
transportation cost. In 2010 WFP bought 78 percent of
the food it needed in developing countries. However, the
challenge it faced was exacerbated by more than 30
nations imposing food export bans in an effort to protect
their own consumers. While humanitarian exports are
usually exempt from such bans, the process of negotiating
with each government when WFP encountered the ban
took valuable time.

How is WFP responding?
Prior to the food price crisis WFP was unable to procure
food until it actually received a financial contribution from
a donor. Following the 2008 food price crisis, WFP’s
Executive Board moved quickly to provide authority to
pre-purchase and pre-position food for vulnerable
populations once a financial commitment was made. A
US$60 million forward purchase facility was put in place
to buy commodities and pay shipping costs prior to
receipt of donor contributions.
WFP is now planning to expand this system to increase
the level of forward planning and purchasing it undertakes
to include pre-positioning of stocks for quick delivery to
vulnerable people affected by food crises, supported by an
expanded revolving financing facility of US$150 million.
Stocks will be located along up to eight major
humanitarian corridors. This facility does not enable WFP to
hedge either commodity price or exchange rate risk, but
does allow it to shorten the time between food needs
being identified, financial resources being obtained and
food being delivered to those in need.

Policy options to address price volatility and high prices

For example, weather-index-based insurance was first used
at the national level in Ethiopia in 2006 and in Malawi in
2008 to manage production risks; it is still in operation.
Given the technical nature of such market-based approaches
to managing food price volatility, there is a need to establish
institutions at the national level and build up technical
expertise within those institutions.
The principal instruments that could be used to manage
the price volatility of food imports are futures and options
contracts. By buying futures contracts, a government that
wishes to protect itself against a possible surge in the price
of grain locks in a price agreed at the time the contract was
concluded. Futures contracts give the country greater
certainty of the price it will pay for the grain, but do not
offer flexibility. Should the market price move lower, the
government will still have to pay the agreed price, and
hence pay more than it otherwise might have had to.
In poor countries this can create considerable political

difficulty, in addition to the financial loss. In practice,
futures may not be a useful instrument for governments
since there is an unpredictable and potentially large liability
associated with taking a futures position.
Call option contracts lock in a maximum price, but with
no obligation to buy at that high price if market prices
move lower. This is an attractive option if the goal is to
protect a food-importing country against a price surge,
because the country will still be able to benefit from lower
prices after the agreement. Thus, a call option provides
greater flexibility than a futures contract. However, this
flexibility comes at a cost – call options are more expensive
than futures contracts – and governments must be willing
to pay the premium. Depending on the fiscal situation of
the particular government, and their dependence on
imports, some governments may decide to self-insure,
paying high prices on occasion but avoiding the fees
involved in purchasing call options year in and year out.

Coping with price volatility after the fact:
targeted safety nets and emergency food reserves
Key message
In order to be effective at reducing the negative
consequences of price volatility, targeted safety-net
mechanisms must be designed in advance and in
consultation with the most vulnerable people.

Surges in food prices and increases in the prices of inputs
such as fertilizers reduce the incomes of poor and vulnerable
households and put stress on family budgets. In response,
households sell off assets, take children out of school or
change their diets to include cheaper, less nutritious
ingredients, all of which have consequences that last long
after the price surge has receded. The long-lasting nature of
such impacts provides both a humanitarian and an economic
rationale for safety nets that mitigate the impact of the
shock. School feeding programmes, for example, can help to
prevent children from leaving school during a crisis, thus
reducing the long-term impact of the price shock on human
capital.
For poor consumers, scaling-up existing safety nets is a
viable option in countries where these are already in place.
This could be achieved by adding new beneficiaries, by
increasing transfers made to current beneficiaries or both.

However, such safety nets require a lot of resources. This
presents an obstacle, especially for low-income developing
countries, which cannot afford such expenditures in times of
crisis. Foreign support will have to be mobilized quickly to
enable these countries to meet the increased demand on
their budgets.
Another difficulty is that many countries do not already
have safety-net mechanisms in place. It is of critical
importance to design safety net mechanisms ex ante, even if
funds are not sufficient to implement them at first. Having
identified the vulnerable, particularly pregnant and lactating
women and children under two years of age, the safety net
or emergency food reserve could be activated as soon as a
crisis hits, using funds from the international community. For
example, a key component of many safety nets, particularly
social cash transfers, is the delivery of cash to women,
which can enhance their status in the community and within
the household as well as resulting in better health and
nutrition outcomes for children. But such interventions
require careful planning if they are to be effective, not a
rushed approach in response to a crisis. Planning ahead will
lead to better outcomes.
If safety nets are provided in terms of food (as opposed to
cash), emergency reserves will be needed before the food aid
arrives, including specialized foods for children aged six

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

39

Policy options to address price volatility and high prices

months to two years. These reserves should be well linked
to effective information and early warning systems. They
should be strategically located, taking into account trade-offs
between increased monitoring costs when the reserve is too
fragmented, the higher costs involved if it were stored
entirely in food-deficit areas and the longer response time
entailed if it were stored entirely in food-surplus areas.
The size of the reserve should also be carefully determined.
At a minimum, it should provide for 1–2 months of
requirements, depending on how long it takes to replenish
supplies; at most it should be enough to meet the food
requirements of only the vulnerable, not to provide general
subsidies to all.
Food reserve agencies should operate with well-defined
rules and enjoy autonomy from the political process, similar
to that of a central bank. When it is necessary to replenish
reserves, the agency should purchase stocks in a way that
does not increase uncertainty for private traders, who should
handle the bulk of the crop. Food reserve agencies should
also collaborate across borders in order to pool risks more
efficiently. The recently expanded ASEAN (Association of
Southeast Asian Nations) Plus Three emergency rice reserve is
a promising development in this regard.
In cases where countries may not have the capacity to
operate national emergency reserves, strategic food-reserve
systems could be established at the regional level. In regions
where food crises are likely to recur and transport
infrastructure is weak, such emergency reserves can quickly
provide food to the hungry. In 2008, WFP achieved rapid and
cost-effective food delivery to beneficiaries across countries
in the Eastern and Southern Africa region through a pilot
forward purchase facility scheme implemented at a regional
level. Any such regional system should provide the
foundation for an eventual transition to national ownership
and control.
Some nations that imposed export restrictions during
2008 and 2010 made exemptions for purchases of
humanitarian food, including those by WFP. However, others
have not made such exemptions, forcing humanitarian
agencies to purchase food from more distant sources. Most
exemptions, if made, are on a case-by-case basis after
concern has been raised and the exemption requested. This
results in loss of valuable emergency response time and
resources, as procurement teams have to spend time
negotiating for exemptions or finding alternative suppliers
from other regions.
Many nations have agreed to commit to exempt
humanitarian purchases from export bans, first at the G8
Summit in L’Aquila, Italy, in July 2009 and then at the World

40

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

Summit on Food Security in Rome in November 2009,
where all FAO member states agreed to “remove food
export restrictions or extraordinary taxes for food purchased
for non-commercial humanitarian purposes, and to consult
and notify in advance before imposing any such new
restrictions”. This commitment was also made at the G20
Agriculture Ministers’ Meeting in June 2011 (see Box 11).
If honoured, these commitments would allow food to be
shipped rapidly to where it is needed in an emergency.
While price surges will benefit farmers with a surplus to
sell, producer safety nets may help protect the livelihoods of
some smallholder farmers if there is a significant and rapid
increase in the international price of fertilizers or other
inputs. Higher prices for these inputs, coupled with the fact
that inputs must be purchased several months before the
harvest, may mean that farmers are forced to curtail their
use, which could reduce yields and have negative effects on
the livelihood of smallholders.
Targeted input support enhances the ability of
smallholders to respond to the increase in food prices and
contributes towards household and national food security.
However, targeted input subsidies involve high costs, and
such programmes are difficult to manage, especially during
periods characterized by volatile food and input prices. For
example, it is typically very difficult to make sure that
fertilizer is delivered on time to farmers. Even if this problem
is solved, political pressures for expansion of input support
programmes may lead to an unsustainable fiscal burden that
may hinder rather than promote long-run growth.
Therefore, it is important that such programmes are
temporary and target only those farmers that have no
means to finance input purchases.69
At the international level, it can be difficult for many
poor countries to afford the higher import bills that come
with food price spikes. During the recent price surge, a
number of countries that experienced significant increases in
their food and fertilizer import bills resorted to the
International Monetary Fund’s Exogenous Shock Facility
(ESF). The ESF provides liquidity to mitigate the negative
impact of exogenous shocks on developing countries’
balance of payments, international reserves position and
inflation. Such facilities could be expanded to enable a
country to finance food imports when the need arises,
rather than to compensate them for balance of payment
losses after the fact. Mechanisms such as the World Bank’s
Global Food Crisis Response Programme, which is targeted
at the poorest and most vulnerable countries, should be
supported, as well as efforts for a broader crisis window
under the International Development Association.

Policy options to address price volatility and high prices

BOX 11

Outcomes of the G20 Agriculture Ministers’ Meeting

On 23 June 2011, G20 Agriculture Ministers met to
tackle the issue of food price volatility, with the ultimate
objective to improve food security. They agreed on an
“Action Plan on food price volatility and agriculture”
that will be submitted to the G20 Leaders at their
summit in November 2011. The discussions were based
on an Inter-agency Report on Food Price Volatility
prepared by FAO, OECD, IFAD, IMF, the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), WFP,
the World Bank, the World Trade Organization (WTO),
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), and
the UN High-Level Task Force on Global Food Security.
The effort of these ten international organizations was
coordinated by FAO and OECD. The report put forward
a number of concrete policy options aimed at reducing
volatility and mitigating its negative effects on countries
and the vulnerable.
The G20 Agriculture Ministers’ Meeting adopted several
recommendations put forward by the Inter-agency report.
Among these recommendations are:
1. Agricultural production and productivity: G20
governments committed to implementing a broad
scope of actions to boost agricultural productivity
growth, increase food production and strengthen the
longer-term sustainability and resilience of the food
and agriculture system, paying special attention to
smallholders, especially women and young farmers.
Such actions will include strengthening agricultural
research and innovation and creating the enabling
environment to encourage public and private
investment in agriculture.
2. Market information and transparency: G20
governments will launch the Agricultural Market
Information System (AMIS) to increase collaboration
among international organizations, major food
exporting and importing countries and the private
sector with the objective of providing accurate and

3.

4.

5.

transparent information. AMIS will be based on
existing information mechanisms and will be housed
in FAO.
International policy coordination: G20
governments also called for the establishment of a
Rapid Response Forum within AMIS to enhance
international policy coordination. The Rapid Response
Forum will discuss appropriate policy responses when
the market situation indicates a high risk of food
insecurity and will work closely with the Committee
on World Food Security (CFS) to promote greater
international policy convergence.
Reducing the effects of price volatility on the
most vulnerable: G20 Agriculture Ministers called
upon multilateral development banks and
international organizations to develop risk
management tools and help mainstream risk
management, in particular for smallholders, and to
further explore counter-cyclical mechanisms for
vulnerable countries in the event of external shocks,
including food price surges. The Ministers also
supported initiatives to maximize efficient delivery of
food assistance and strengthen supply chains against
price and supply shocks, in particular through
forward-positioning networks and mainstreaming risk
management in international food-assistance
procurement. The G20 also agreed to remove export
restrictions and extraordinary taxes for food
purchased for non-commercial humanitarian
purposes by WFP, and agreed not to impose them in
the future.
Financial regulation: G20 Agriculture Ministers
strongly encouraged G20 Finance Ministers to take
the appropriate decisions for better regulation and
supervision of agricultural futures and derivative
markets.

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

41

Policy options to address price volatility and high prices

Preventing price volatility in the long term:
increasing the productivity, sustainability and
resilience of agriculture
Key message
Investment in agriculture will improve the
competitiveness of domestic production, increase
farmers’ profits and make food more affordable for the
poor. Private investment will form the bulk of this
investment, but public investment has a catalytic role
to play in supplying public goods that the private
sector will not provide. These investments should
consider the rights of existing users of land and related
natural resources, benefit local communities, promote
food security and not cause undue harm to the
environment.

The global agriculture sector faces significant challenges in
the coming four decades. Continued population growth will
drive up food demand, while climate change and natural
resource degradation will create challenges on the supply
side, both in terms of average production and in terms of
production volatility. FAO estimates indicate that global
agricultural production will need to grow by 70 percent
between 2005–07 and 2050, and by almost 100 percent in
developing countries, to feed a population of more than
9 billion people in 2050. Insufficient growth in production
will lead to higher and more volatile prices.
It is important to note that increased production at the
farm level is not the only way to increase supplies and meet
demand. FAO recently estimated that 1.3 billion tonnes of
food are lost or wasted globally each year. Most of the waste
is in developed countries and most of the losses are in
developing countries. The challenge is to find cost-effective
ways to reduce such waste and losses. Thus, research and
investment in improved post-harvest management and
logistics will be an important component of a broader
agricultural development strategy.
Investment to create a more productive and efficient
agriculture sector will make food more affordable for the
poor and reduce price volatility as well. In addition, there is
clear demand for such investment from the rural poor
themselves. According to Gallup polls in sub-Saharan Africa,
people think that agriculture is the most important issue for
their governments to address, and they rank reducing

42

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

poverty and hunger as the two most important of the
Millennium Development Goals.70 Increased investment will
lead to more rapid agricultural growth, which has been
shown to have a greater positive impact on the income of
the poor than growth from outside agriculture (Figure 17).71
Greater income for the poor will make households less
vulnerable to economic shocks such as price fluctuations and
reduce the danger of poverty traps.
There are encouraging signs that agricultural capital
stocks – buildings, equipment, livestock and the like – may
be starting to increase. Agricultural capital per worker was
largely stagnant in low- and middle-income countries from
the middle of the 1980s to the early part of the 2000s, but
increased in 2004 and 2005, the most recent years for which
data are available.72 These increases need to be sustained
over long periods of time: doubling the agricultural output
of developing countries will require an average annual gross
investment of US$209 billion (in 2009 US dollars), roughly

FIGURE 17

An increase in agricultural growth has a stronger,
more positive impact on the income of the poor than
does an equivalent increase in non-agricultural growth
Percentage growth in income
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Income decile

Agricultural growth

Non-agricultural growth

Note: Income decile 1 refers to the poorest 10 percent of the population, and so on.
Expenditure is used as a proxy for income, as is common in analysis of household survey data.
Source: E. Ligon and E. Sadoulet. 2007. Estimating the effects of aggregate agricultural
growth on the distribution of expenditures. Background paper for the World Development
Report 2008 (available at http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTWDR2008/Resources/
2795087-1191427986785/LigonE&SadouletE_EstimatingEffectsOfAggAgGr.pdf).

Policy options to address price volatility and high prices

50 percent more than current levels.73 This total includes
investment needed in primary agriculture and necessary
downstream services such as storage and processing
facilities, but does not include public goods such as roads,
large-scale irrigation projects and electrification that are also
needed. Delivering investment on this scale is a formidable
challenge, but one that must be met if the world is to
eliminate hunger.
Most of the investment, both in primary agriculture and
downstream sectors, will have to come from private sources.
Farmers themselves must purchase implements and
machinery, make investments to improve soil fertility and
acquire knowledge to improve the management of their
farms. Private-sector investment also needs to be
encouraged at all stages in the value chain – upstream of the
farm, in seed and fertilizer production and distribution, and
downstream, in processing, marketing and distribution.
Farmers and prospective farmers will invest in agriculture
only if their investments are profitable, however, and this
requires an appropriate policy and regulatory environment as
well as investment in a wide range of public goods. Three
types of public investment are critical:
•
direct investment in agricultural research and
development to increase productivity and to enhance
the ability of agricultural systems, especially smallholder
farms, to cope with climate change and resource
scarcity;
•
investments to link the primary agriculture sector with
the sources of demand, including agricultural
institutions, extension services, rural roads, ports, power,
storage and irrigation systems; and
•
non-agricultural investment to enhance the rural
institutional environment and improve human wellbeing; such investments include education, particularly
of women, sanitation and clean water supply, and
health care.
All of these investments have been shown to have
consistently high rates of return, both in financial terms and
in terms of reducing poverty.74 Investment to increase the
productivity and resilience of developing country agriculture
can contribute to improving food security in multiple ways.
It can reduce food price volatility through increased
productivity and improved technical management of
production and of risk, especially in the face of climate
change. It can help farmers and households to cope better
with the effects of volatility once it occurs. It can also make
food more affordable for poor consumers and increase the

incomes of poor farmers. These investments will be more
effective at reducing poverty if they are appropriate for
small-scale farmers, who will account for a substantial share
of production in developing countries for the foreseeable
future.
Much public research is carried out by the international
research centres of the Consultative Group on International
Agricultural Research (CGIAR), although public research
institutes in countries such as Brazil, China and India are
providing an increasing share of public goods in the area of
agricultural research. A new multi-donor trust fund, the
CGIAR Fund, has been established to harmonize donor
investments in key global challenges on agriculture and is
being hosted and managed by the World Bank. New resultsoriented research programmes focus on policies and
technologies to mitigate climate change and adapt to its
effects; these include a broad group of partners. There is a
need to increase and sustain the financing of such bodies in
order that they may continue to invest today in the
techniques and innovations that will be needed to deal with
the food security and climate challenges that will be faced in
the future.
Increasing public investment in transport and productive
infrastructure, as well as in human capital, is also central to
stimulating productivity and reducing post-harvest wastage.
Improvements to infrastructure, in particular rural roads,
irrigation and market facilities such as warehouses, cold
storage facilities and market-information systems, will reduce
transport costs, integrate smallholders into markets and
reduce price volatility. Improvements to extension, education
and health are also key elements of a sound policy approach
to increasing the productivity and enhancing the food
security and the well-being of farmers and consumers.
These types of investment in human capital, infrastructure
and science are very basic, but they are nevertheless essential
to enable the poor to lift themselves out of poverty. It is hard
to imagine that food insecurity will be eradicated if they are
not made. We have made progress in alleviating poverty and
food insecurity and can do more if we build on sound
analysis, good science and adequate funding for appropriate
interventions. This will require the commitment of the entire
international community to raising the profile of agriculture,
not just for the next year or two but ultimately until
everyone, at all times, has physical, social and economic
access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food that meets their
dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy
life.

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

43

Technical annex
ANNEX TABLE
Prevalence of undernourishment and progress towards the World Food Summit (WFS)1 and the Millennium
Development Goal (MDG)2 targets in developing countries3
WORLD
Region/subregion/country

Total
population

Number of people undernourished

2006–08

1990–92 1995–97 2000–02 2006–08

(millions)

(millions)

Proportion of undernourished in total population

Change Progress
so far towards
WFS
(%)
target4

1990–92 1995–97 2000–02 2006–08
(%)

Change Progress
so far towards
MDG
(%)
target4

16

14

14

13

–19

–

–

–

–

na

20

17

17

15

–22

39

41

35

33

–16

34

34

31

26

–24

11.8

n
n
n
n
n
n

23

24

20

21

–10

n
n
n
n
n
n

223.6

30.8

n

26

26

24

23

–11

n

5.6

6.1

23.4

–

–

–

–

na

1.5

1.4

ns

na

–

5

5

–

na

ns

ns

ns

ns

na

–

–

–

–

na

6.2

ns

ns

ns

ns

na

–

–

–

–

na

31.2

1.5

1.6

1.6

ns

na

6

6

6

–

na

10.1

ns

ns

ns

ns

na

–

–

–

–

na

801.5

165.9

188.2

197.7

217.5

31.1

31

31

29

27

–13

17.6

7.4

7.8

7.6

7.2

–2.4

67

61

52

41

–39

Benin

8.4

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

–0.3

20

18

15

12

–41

Botswana

1.9

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.5

85.4

19

23

27

25

36

14.7

1.2

1.2

1.4

1.2

–3.0

14

12

12

8

–40

7.8

2.5

3.5

3.9

4.9

93.8

44

56

59

62

43

18.7

4.2

5.0

4.3

4.2

–0.5

33

34

26

22

–33

4.3

1.3

1.6

1.6

1.7

30.2

44

47

43

40

–8

Chad

10.6

3.8

3.9

3.7

4.1

8.3

60

53

43

39

–36

Congo

3.6

1.0

1.2

0.6

0.5

–55.4

42

41

20

13

–68

20.1

1.9

2.6

2.9

2.9

50.9

15

17

17

14

–2

4.8

2.1

2.1

2.7

3.1

44.9

67

64

70

65

–4

Ethiopia

78.7

34.7

36.2

32.6

32.6

–6.1

69

62

48

41

–40

Gabon

1.4

0.1

ns

ns

ns

na

6

–

–

–

na

Gambia

1.6

0.1

0.3

0.3

0.3

143.9

14

23

21

19

41

Ghana

22.9

4.3

2.3

1.9

1.1

–74.0

28

13

9

5

–83

Guinea

9.6

1.3

1.5

1.7

1.6

23.5

20

19

20

16

–18

Kenya

37.8

8.1

9.0

10.6

12.4

54.1

n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n

33

32

33

33

–1

n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n

WORLD

6 652.5

848.4

791.5

836.2

850.0

0.2

Developed regions

1 231.3

15.3

17.5

15.4

10.6

–30.8

5 420.2

833.2

774.0

820.8

839.4

0.8

796.7

211.2

249.4

244.7

263.8

24.9

382.8

90.2

101.6

102.5

98.3

8.9

52.2

9.6

10.9

9.7

10.7

AFRICA

962.9

170.9

193.6

203.3

Northern Africa

161.4

5.0

5.4

Algeria

33.9

ns

Egypt

80.1

Developing regions
Least-developed countries

5

Landlocked developing countries

6

Small island developing states7

Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Morocco
Tunisia
Sub-Saharan Africa

8

Angola

Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African Republic

Côte d’Ivoire
Eritrea

44

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

ANNEX TABLE
Prevalence of undernourishment and progress towards the World Food Summit (WFS)1 and the Millennium
Development Goal (MDG)2 targets in developing countries3
WORLD
Region/subregion/country

Total
population

Number of people undernourished

2006–08

1990–92 1995–97 2000–02 2006–08

(millions)

(millions)

Proportion of undernourished in total population

Change Progress
so far towards
WFS
(%)
target4

1990–92 1995–97 2000–02 2006–08
(%)

Change Progress
so far towards
MDG
(%)
target4

15

16

14

14

–7

30

32

36

32

7

21

26

28

25

24

43

36

30

27

–37

27

25

18

12

–56

12

9

8

8

–34

7

7

5

5

–30

59

47

46

38

–36

32

30

21

18

–43

37

37

27

16

–55

16

10

9

6

–61

44

53

38

32

–28

22

26

26

19

–14

45

39

43

35

–22

–

–

–

–

na

39

29

28

22

–44

12

21

18

19

63

43

36

36

30

–31

19

23

19

22

15

29

42

40

34

15

35

38

43

44

23

–14.1

n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n

40

44

41

30

–26

n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n

567.8

-6.5

n

20

16

16

15

-27

n

12.4

6.7

–38.8

16

13

17

9

–45

1.1

0.9

0.6

na

45

36

28

21

–53

2.0

2.2

0.9

ns

–90.2

27

27

11

–

na

4.4

3.1

1.0

0.5

0.3

–91.8

58

19

12

6

–90

Kazakhstan

15.4

ns

ns

1.2

ns

na

–

–

8

–

na

Kyrgyzstan

5.3

0.8

0.6

0.9

0.6

–24.4

17

13

17

11

–37

Tajikistan

6.7

1.8

2.4

2.9

1.8

–4.6

34

42

46

26

–23

Turkmenistan

5.0

0.3

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.9

n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n

9

9

9

7

–23

n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n

Lesotho

2.0

0.2

0.3

0.3

0.3

15.6

Liberia

3.6

0.6

0.7

1.1

1.1

85.0

Madagascar

18.6

2.4

3.5

4.4

4.7

98.7

Malawi

14.4

4.2

3.8

3.6

3.9

–5.9

Mali

12.4

2.4

2.5

1.9

1.5

–38.1

Mauritania

3.1

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

1.9

Mauritius

1.3

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

–17.2

21.9

8.2

7.8

8.5

8.3

0.8

2.1

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

–18.5

14.1

3.0

3.5

3.1

2.3

–22.2

147.7

16.3

10.9

11.9

9.4

–42.3

Rwanda

9.5

3.0

3.0

3.1

3.0

0.3

Senegal

11.9

1.7

2.3

2.6

2.3

32.4

Sierra Leone

5.4

1.8

1.6

1.9

1.9

3.6

South Africa

49.2

ns

ns

ns

ns

na

Sudan

40.4

10.8

9.3

9.8

8.8

–17.9

Swaziland

1.2

0.1

0.2

0.2

0.2

110.9

Togo

6.3

1.7

1.7

1.9

1.9

7.6

Uganda

30.6

3.5

4.9

4.8

6.7

92.5

United Republic of Tanzania

41.3

7.7

12.8

14.0

13.9

79.9

Zambia

12.3

2.9

3.6

4.7

5.4

86.5

Zimbabwe

12.5

4.3

5.3

5.1

3.7

3 884.3

607.1

526.2

565.7

75.4

10.9

9.2

Armenia

3.1

1.6

Azerbaijan

8.6

Georgia

Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria

ASIA

Caucasus and Central Asia

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

45

Technical annex
ANNEX TABLE
Prevalence of undernourishment and progress towards the World Food Summit (WFS)1 and the Millennium
Development Goal (MDG)2 targets in developing countries3
WORLD
Region/subregion/country

Uzbekistan

Total
population

Number of people undernourished

2006–08

1990–92 1995–97 2000–02 2006–08

(millions)

(millions)

Change Progress
so far towards
WFS
(%)
target4

26.9

1.1

1.2

4.7

2.8

152.6

Eastern Asia

1 410.8

215.6

149.5

141.8

139.4

–35.3

China

1 336.5

210.0

141.7

132.8

129.6

–38.3

23.7

4.2

6.6

7.8

8.4

99.6

2.6

0.6

0.8

0.6

0.7

11.4

Republic of Korea

48.0

ns

ns

ns

ns

na

Eastern Asia - excluding China

74.3

5.5

7.9

9.0

9.8

77.1

1 642.8

267.5

269.0

307.9

330.1

23.4

157.7

44.4

54.2

42.3

41.4

–6.8

1 164.6

177.0

167.1

208.0

224.6

26.9

Iran (Islamic Republic of)

72.4

ns

ns

ns

ns

na

Nepal

28.3

4.2

4.4

4.6

4.7

13.3

Pakistan

173.2

29.5

26.8

36.3

42.8

45.0

Sri Lanka

19.9

4.8

4.5

3.9

3.9

–18.4

Southern Asia - excluding India

478.1

90.5

101.9

99.9

105.5

16.7

South-Eastern Asia

564.0

105.8

86.0

89.6

77.4

–26.9

Cambodia

14.3

3.8

4.7

3.8

3.6

–4.5

Indonesia

224.7

28.9

22.0

30.4

29.7

2.9

6.1

1.3

1.4

1.4

1.4

3.1

Malaysia

26.6

ns

ns

ns

ns

na

Philippines

88.7

15.3

14.1

14.6

11.8

–22.9

Thailand

67.0

15.0

11.1

11.5

10.7

–28.9

86.1

21.0

16.7

13.3

9.6

–54.5

191.3

7.4

12.5

13.9

14.2

93.0

Jordan

5.9

ns

0.2

0.2

ns

na

Kuwait

2.8

0.4

0.1

0.1

0.1

–65.7

Lebanon

4.2

ns

ns

ns

ns

na

Saudi Arabia

24.7

ns

ns

ns

ns

na

Syrian Arab Republic

20.5

ns

ns

ns

ns

na

Turkey

73.0

ns

ns

ns

ns

na

4.4

ns

ns

ns

ns

na

22.3

3.8

5.0

5.7

6.7

75.3

Dem. People’s Rep. of Korea
Mongolia

Southern Asia

9

Bangladesh
India

10

Lao People’s Dem. Rep.

Viet Nam
Western Asia

11

United Arab Emirates
Yemen

46

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

Proportion of undernourished in total population

n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n

1990–92 1995–97 2000–02 2006–08
(%)

Change Progress
so far towards
MDG
(%)
target4

5

5

19

11

97

18

12

10

10

–44

18

12

10

10

–46

21

30

34

35

72

28

33

27

27

–5

–

–

–

–

na

8

11

13

13

57

22

20

21

20

–8

38

41

30

26

–30

20

17

20

19

–4

–

–

–

–

na

21

20

18

17

–22

25

20

24

25

–1

28

25

20

20

–28

26

26

23

22

–16

24

18

17

14

–42

38

40

29

25

–33

16

11

15

13

–17

31

29

26

22

–27

–

–

–

–

na

24

20

18

13

–44

26

18

18

16

–39

31

22

17

11

–64

6

8

8

7

32

–

5

5

–

na

20

5

6

5

–75

–

–

–

–

na

–

–

–

–

na

–

–

–

–

na

–

–

–

–

na

–

–

–

–

na

30

31

31

30

2

n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n

ANNEX TABLE
Prevalence of undernourishment and progress towards the World Food Summit (WFS)1 and the Millennium
Development Goal (MDG)2 targets in developing countries3
WORLD
Region/subregion/country

Total
population

Number of people undernourished

2006–08

1990–92 1995–97 2000–02 2006–08

(millions)

(millions)

Proportion of undernourished in total population

Change Progress
so far towards
WFS
(%)
target4

1990–92 1995–97 2000–02 2006–08
(%)

Change Progress
so far towards
MDG
(%)
target4

564.3

54.4

53.4

50.8

47.0

–13.7

n

12

11

10

8

–32

n

Caribbean12

36.1

7.7

8.9

7.4

8.3

7.6

25

28

22

23

–10

Cuba

11.2

0.6

1.5

ns

ns

na

6

14

–

–

na

Dominican Republic

9.8

2.1

2.1

2.2

2.3

11.7

28

26

25

24

–14

Haiti

9.7

4.6

4.8

4.7

5.5

21.7

63

60

53

57

–9

Jamaica

2.7

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.1

–52.3

11

6

5

5

–58

1.3

0.1

0.2

0.1

0.2

14.2

11

14

11

11

6

528.2

46.7

44.5

43.4

38.6

–17.2

11

10

9

7

–35

39.5

ns

ns

ns

ns

na

–

–

–

–

na

9.5

2.0

1.9

1.9

2.5

29.7

29

24

22

27

–7

Brazil

190.1

17.1

16.6

16.2

11.7

–31.5

11

10

9

6

–45

Chile

16.6

0.9

ns

ns

ns

na

7

–

–

–

na

Colombia

44.4

5.2

4.0

3.9

4.1

–20.7

15

11

10

9

–40

Costa Rica

4.5

ns

ns

ns

ns

na

–

–

–

–

na

13.3

2.4

1.8

2.1

2.0

–16.1

23

16

17

15

–34

El Salvador

6.1

0.7

0.7

0.4

0.6

–17.6

13

12

7

9

–27

Guatemala

13.4

1.4

2.1

2.5

2.9

113.4

15

20

22

22

46

Guyana

0.8

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

–60.6

20

11

7

8

–61

Honduras

7.2

1.0

0.9

0.9

0.9

–10.6

19

16

14

12

–37

107.5

ns

ns

ns

ns

na

–

–

–

–

na

Nicaragua

5.6

2.1

1.8

1.3

1.1

–50.4

50

38

25

19

–62

Panama

3.3

0.5

0.6

0.6

0.5

10.4

18

20

19

15

–19

Paraguay

6.1

0.7

0.5

0.5

0.6

–11.3

16

10

10

10

–37

28.5

6.1

5.0

4.7

4.5

–26.1

27

21

18

16

–42

Suriname

0.5

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

27.9

14

13

15

15

3

Uruguay

3.3

0.2

ns

ns

ns

na

5

–

–

–

na

27.7

2.1

3.1

3.3

1.9

–6.5

n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n

10

14

13

7

–32

n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n

8.8

0.7

0.8

1.0

1.0

42.0

n

12

11

13

12

–2

n

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

Trinidad and Tobago
Latin America

13

Argentina
Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

Ecuador

Mexico

Peru

Venezuela (Bolivarian Rep. of)

OCEANIA14

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

47

N O T E S

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

48

The undernourishment estimates referred
to in this discussion are calculated using
the standard FAO methodology, modified
when necessary to take account of
incomplete data on production and trade.
See FAO. 2008. The State of Food
Insecurity in the World 2008. High food
prices and food security – threats and
opportunities. Rome, p. 7.
M. Demeke, G. Pangrazio and M. Maetz.
2009. Country responses to the food
security crisis: nature and preliminary
implications of the policies pursued. FAO
Initiative on Soaring Food Prices (available
at ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/011/
ak177e/ak177e00.pdf).
J. Piesse and C. Thirtle. 2009. Three bubbles
and a panic: An explanatory review of
recent food commodity price events. Food
Policy, 34(2): 119–129; C.L. Gilbert. 2010.
How to understand high food prices.
Journal of Agricultural Economics, 61: 398–
425; D. Headey and S. Fan. 2010.
Reflections on the global food crisis: how
did it happen? How has it hurt? And how
can we prevent the next one? IFPRI Research
Monograph 165. Washington, DC,
International Food Policy Research Institute;
D. Headey. 2011. Rethinking the global food
crisis: the role of trade shocks. Food Policy,
36(2): 136–146; B. Wright and C. Cafiero.
2011. Grain reserves and food security in
the Middle East and North Africa. Food
Security, 3(Suppl. 1): S61–S76. FAO. 2009.
Insecurity in the World 2009. Economic
crises impacts and lessons learned. Rome.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) and FAO.
OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2011–
2020 (available at http://www.agrioutlook.org).
FAO. 2011. The State of the World’s Land
and Water Resources for Food and
Agriculture. FAO Conference Document
C2011/32. Thirty-seventh Session. Rome,
25 June–2 July.
World energy markets are much larger
than world food commodity markets.
Thus, food commodity prices will not have
much effect on world energy markets.
R. López and G. Galinato. 2007. Should
governments stop subsidies to private goods?
Evidence from rural Latin America. Journal
of Public Economics, 91(5): 1071–1094.

8

FAO. 2009. The State of Food Insecurity in
the World 2009. Economic crises –
impacts and lessons learned. Rome.

9

For a more detailed assessment of the
evidence, see D. Dawe, S. Block, A. Gulati,

J. Huang and S. Ito. 2010. Domestic rice
price, trade and marketing policies.
In S. Pandey, D. Byerlee, D. Dawe,
A. Dobermann, S. Mohanty, S. Rozelle and
B. Hardy, eds. Rice in the global economy:
strategic research and policy issues for food
security, pp. 379–407. Los Baños, Philippines,
International Rice Research Institute.
10 M.A. Aksoy and A. Isid-Dikmelik. 2008.
Are low food prices pro-poor? Net food
buyers and sellers in low-income
countries. Policy Research Working Paper
4642. Washington, DC, World Bank.
11 M. Ivanic and W. Martin. 2008.
Implications of higher global food prices
for poverty in low-income countries.
Agricultural Economics, 39: 405–416.
12 A. Zezza, B. Davis, C. Azzarri,
K. Covarrubias, L. Tasciotti and G. Anríquez.
2008. The impact of rising food prices on
the poor. ESA Working Paper 08-07. Rome,
FAO (available at ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/
fao/011/aj284e/aj284e00.pdf).
13 M. Robles and M. Torero. 2010.
Understanding the impact of high food
prices in Latin America. Economia, 10(2):
117–164. The difference in findings on
impact of higher prices in Peru between
Robles and Torero (2010) and Ivanic and
Martin (2008) (see note 11) is most likely
due to the fact that Robles and Torero
used actual price changes, while Ivanic
and Martin used a uniform price change
across commodities.
14 Dawe et al. (2010) (see note 9).
15 The analysis in this report focuses on staple
foods, as does most of the literature on this
area. This focus has been driven by the
large share of staple foods in the budget of
the poor, and by the large price fluctuations
for these commodities on world markets.
Overall food-price inflation has fewer spikes
and smaller increases than staple food
prices, but the basket used to calculate
food-price inflation is not representative of
the budgets of the poor and thus is less
relevant from a food-security perspective.
16 S. Block, L. Kiess, P. Webb, S. Kosen,
R. Moench-Pfanner, M.W. Bloem and
C.P. Timmer. 2004. Macro shocks and
micro outcomes: child nutrition during
Indonesia’s crisis. Economics and Human
Biology, 2(1): 21–44.
17 H. Torlesse, L. Kiess and M.W. Bloem.
2003. Association of household rice
expenditure with child nutritional status
indicates a role for macroeconomic food
policy in combating malnutrition. Journal
of Nutrition, 133(5): 1320–1325.

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

18 A. de Brauw. 2011. Migration and child
development during the food price crisis
in El Salvador. Food Policy, 36(1): 28–40.
19 A. D’Souza and D. Jolliffe. 2010. Rising
food prices and coping strategies:
household-level evidence from
Afghanistan. World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper 5466. Washington, DC,
The World Bank.
20 FAO. 2008. The State of Food Insecurity
in the World 2008. High food prices and
food security – threats and opportunities.
Rome; N. Kumar and A. Quisumbing.
2011. Gendered impacts of the 2007–08
food price crisis: evidence using panel
data from rural Ethiopia. IFPRI Discussion
Paper 01093. Washington, DC,
International Food Policy Research
Institute.
21 S. Bhalotra, and M. Umaña-Aponte.
2009. Distress work amongst women?
Micro data evidence from 66 developing
countries on women’s work participation
as an insurance device. Bristol, UK,
Department of Economics, University of
Bristol.
22 J. Aranda, 2000. Respuestas campesinas
a la crisis del café: las mujeres cafetaleras
se organizan. In J. Aranda, C. Botey and
R. Robles, eds. Tiempo de crisis, tiempo
de mujeres. Oaxaca, Mexico, Universidad
Autónoma Benito Juárez de Oaxaca.
23 M. Floro. 1995. Women’s well-being,
poverty and work intensity. Feminist
Economics, 1(3): 1–25.
24 S. Baird and N.S. Friedman. 2007.
Aggregate income shocks and infant
mortality in the developing world. Policy
Research Working Paper 4346.
Washington, DC, The World Bank.
25 A. Chapoto and T.S. Jayne. 2010. Maize
price instability in Eastern and Southern
Africa: the impact of trade barriers and
market interventions. Paper presented at
the COMESA policy seminar on
“Variation in staple food prices: causes,
consequences and policy options”,
Maputo, Mozambique, 25–26 January
2010 (available at http://programmes.
comesa.int/attachments/186_AAMP
Maize price instability (7 Jan).pdf).
26 K. Basu. 1986. The market for land: an
analysis of interim transactions. Journal
of Development Economics, 20(1):
163–177.
27 For more information on the
macroeconomic and political impacts,
see: C.P. Timmer and D. Dawe. 2007.

Managing food price instability in Asia:
a macro food security perspective.
Asian Economic Journal, 21(1): 1–18;
A. Prakash. 2011. Why volatility matters.
In A. Prakash, ed. Safeguarding food
security in volatile global markets. Rome,
FAO (available at http://www.fao.org/
economic/est/volatility/vgm/en/); and
R. Arezki and M. Bruckner. 2011.
Food prices and political instability.
International Monetary Fund Working
Paper 11/62. Washington, DC,
International Monetary Fund.
28 S. Gillespie, A. Niehof and G. Rugalema.
2010. AIDS in Africa: dynamics and diversity
of impacts and response. In A. Niehof,
G. Rugalema and S. Gillespie, eds. AIDS and
rural livelihoods. London, Earthscan.
29 H. Kazianga and C. Udry. 2006.
Consumption smoothing? Livestock,
insurance and drought in rural Burkina
Faso. Journal of Development Economics,
79: 413–446.
30 M. Grimm. 2011. Does household income
matter for children’s schooling? Evidence
for rural sub-Saharan Africa. Economics of
Education Review, 30: 740–754; D.
Cogneau and R. Jedwab. 2008.
Household income and investments in
child health and education in Ivory Coast.
Paris School of Economics (mimeo).

rainfall. American Economic Review, 99(3):
1006–1026.
35 M.R. Carter, P.D. Little, T. Mogues, and
W. Negatu. 2007. Poverty traps and
natural disasters in Ethiopia and
Honduras. World Development, 35(5):
835–856.
36 International Fund for Agricultural
Development (IFAD). 2010. Rural Poverty
Report. Rome.
37 M.R. Rosenzweig and K.I. Wolpin. 1993.
Credit market constraints, consumption
smoothing, and the accumulation of
durable production assets in low-income
countries: investments in bullocks in
India. Journal of Political Economy,
101(2): 223– 244.
38 T. Kurosaki and M. Fafchamps. 2002.
Insurance market efficiency and crop
choices in Pakistan. Journal of
Development Economics, 67(2): 419–453.
39 S. Dercon and L. Christiaensen. 2011.
Consumption risk, technology adoption
and poverty traps: evidence from Ethiopia.
Journal of Development Economics (in
press).
40 OECD-FAO (2011) (see note 4).
41 Robles and Torero (2010) (see note 13).

31 J.E. Baez, and I.V. Santos. 2007. Children’s
vulnerability to weather shocks: A natural
disaster as a natural experiment. New
York, USA, Social Science Research
Network (available at http://siteresources.
worldbank.org/INTMIGDEV/
Resources/2838212-1237254959508/
Children_Vulnerability_to_Shocks_
Hurricane_Mitch_in_Nicaragua_as_a_
Natural_Experiment.pdf).
32 J. Hoddinott. 2006. Shocks and their
consequences across and within
households in rural Zimbabwe. Journal of
Development Studies, 42(2): 301–321.
33 World Bank. 2006. Repositioning nutrition
as central to development: a strategy for
large-scale action. Washington, DC;
J. Hoddinott, 2009. Early childhood
nutrition increases adult wages.
EuroChoices, 8 (Special Issue): 34–37;
J.A. Maluccio, J. Hoddinott, J.R. Behrman,
R. Martorell, A.R. Quisumbing and
A.D. Stein. 2009. The impact of improving
nutrition during early childhood on
education among Guatemalan adults.
Economic Journal, 119(537): 734–763.

42 N. Minot. 2011. Transmission of world
food price changes to markets in subSaharan Africa. IFPRI Discussion Paper
01059. Washington, DC, International
Food Policy Research Institute.
43 Demeke, Pangrazio and Maetz (2009) (see
note 2).
44 See D. Dawe, ed. 2010. The rice crisis:
markets, policies and food security.
London, Earthscan and Rome, FAO,
especially C. Fang, How China stabilized
grain prices during the global price crisis; A.
Gulati and M. Dutta, Rice policies in India
in the context of the global rice price spike;
and A. Saifullah, Indonesia’s rice policy and
price stabilization programme: managing
domestic prices during the 2008 crisis.
45 A. Shepherd. 2005. Review of the role of
the private sector in meeting food
emergencies in Zambia. Rome, FAO
(available at http://www.fao.org/
fileadmin/templates/ags/docs/marketing/
esa/zambia.pdf).

America and West African countries using
the CFA franc during this period, so
adjustment for inflation would not
substantially affect the results.
48 Some Thai policies (e.g. domestic
support prices) may indirectly affect the
level of exports. Nevertheless, Thai
domestic prices have tracked world
prices nearly perfectly since 1986.
49 G. Rapsomanikis and A. Sarris. 2008.
Market integration and uncertainty: the
impact of domestic and international
commodity price variability on rural
household income and welfare in Ghana
and Peru. Journal of Development
Studies, 44(9): 1354–1381.
50 P. Dorosh. 2009. Price stabilization,
international trade and cereal stocks:
world price shocks and policy response
in South Asia. Food Security, 1: 137–149.
51 The sample includes all African countries
for which data were available for either
rice or wheat and one traditional staple.
All available data from 2005 to 2010
were used in the analysis.
52 F.T. Portmann, S. Siebert and P. Döll.
2010. MIRCA2000 – Global monthly
irrigated and rainfed crop areas around
the year 2000: a new high-resolution
data set for agricultural and hydrological
modeling. Global Biogeochemical Cycles,
24, GB1011, 24 pp.
doi:10.1029/2008GB003435.
53 A. Quisumbing, R. Meinzen-Dick,
L. Bassett, M. Usnick, L. Pandolfelli,
C. Morden and H.Alderman. 2008.
Helping women respond to the global
food price crisis. IFPRI Policy Brief 7.
Washington, DC, International Food
Policy Research Institute.
54 D. Dawe. 2010. Cereal price
transmission in several large Asian
countries during the global food crisis.
Asian Journal of Agriculture and
Development, 6(1): 1–12; M. Hossain
and U. Deb. 2010. Volatility in rice prices
and policy responses in Bangladesh. In
D. Dawe, ed. The rice crisis: markets,
policies and food security. London,
Earthscan and Rome, FAO.
55 I. Maltsoglou and Y. Khwaja. 2010.
Bioenergy and food security: the BEFS
analysis for Tanzania. Environment and
Natural Resources Management Working
Paper 35. Rome, FAO.

46 See Chapoto and Jayne (2010) (note 25).
34 S. Maccini and Dean Yang. 2009. Under
the weather: Health, schooling, and
economic consequences of early-life

47 Cumulative inflation was about
20 percent in both the United States of

56 H. Höffler and B.W. Owuor Ochieng.
2009. High commodity prices – who gets
the money? A case study on the impact

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

49

of high food and factor prices on Kenyan
farmers. Berlin, Heinrich-BoellFoundation (available at http://www.
boell.de/downloads/worldwide/
HighFoodPrices-WhoGetsTheMoney_
Kenya.pdf).
57 B. Hill. 2008. Shaking the invisible hand.
Rice Today, 7(4): 26–31.
58 P.F. Moya, D. Dawe, D. Pabale,
M. Tiongco, N.V. Chien, S. Devarajan,
A. Djatiharti, N.X. Lai, L. Niyomvit, H.X.
Ping, G. Redondo and P. Wardana. 2004.
The economics of intensively irrigated rice
in Asia. In A. Dobermann, C. Witt and
D. Dawe, eds. Increasing the productivity
of intensive rice systems through sitespecific nutrient management, pp. 29–58.
Enfield, NH, USA, Science Publishers, and
Los Baños, Philippines, International Rice
Research Institute.
59 S. Descargues. 2011. Impact of food price
volatility on incomes and investment of
smallholder farmers in Bangladesh. Rome,
FAO.
60 Höffler and Owuor Ochieng (2009) (see
note 56).
61 D.Headey, S. Malaiyandi, and S. Fan.
2010. Navigating the perfect storm:
reflections on the food, energy and
financial crises. Agricultural Economics,
41(s1): 217–228.

50

62 K.S. Imai, R. Gaiha and G. Thapa. 2011.
Supply response to changes in agricultural
commodity prices in Asian countries.
Journal of Asian Economics, 22: 61–75.
63 J. Subervie. 2008. The variable response
of agricultural supply to world price
instability in developing countries. Journal
of Agricultural Economics, 59(1): 72–92.
64 See Shepherd (2005) (note 45) and
Chapoto and Jayne (2010) (note 25).
65 Often trade controls increase domestic
prices above world prices – in such cases,
these policies add to world supplies.
66 See Shepherd (2005) (note 45).
67 P. Villers and M. Gummert. 2009. Seal of
approval: Hermetic storage of rice is
becoming increasingly popular across
Asia. Rice Today, 8(1): 36–37.
68 J.M. Harris, K. Erickson, J. Johnson,
M. Morehart, R. Strickland, T. Covey,
C. McGath, M. Ahearn, T. Parker,
S. Vogel, R. Williams and R. Dubman.
2009. Agricultural income and finance
outlook. Washington, DC. United States
Department of Agriculture (available at
http://usda.mannlib.cornell.edu/usda/ers/
AIS//2000s/2009/AIS-12-22-2009.pdf).
69 A.B. Banful. 2011. Old problems in the
new solutions? Politically motivated
allocation of program benefits and the

THE STATE OF FOOD INSECURITY IN THE WORLD 2011

“new” fertilizer subsidies. World
Development, 39(7): 1166–1176.
70 B. Tortora and A. Rzepa. 2011. Recent
trends in food security: a perspective from
sub-Saharan Africans. Gallup Social and
Economic Analysis.
71 E. Ligon and E. Sadoulet. 2007.
Estimating the effects of aggregate
agricultural growth on the distribution of
expenditures. Background paper for the
World Development Report 2008
(available at http://siteresources.
worldbank.org/INTWDR2008/
Resources/2795087-1191427986785/
LigonE&SadouletE_
EstimatingEffectsOfAggAgGr.pdf).
72 S. Daidone and G. Anríquez. 2011.
An extended cross-country database for
agricultural investment and capital. ESA
Working Paper 11-16. Rome, FAO
(available at http://www.fao.org/
docrep/014/am640e/am640e00.pdf).
73 FAO. 2009b. Investment. Issues Brief.
High Level Expert Forum on How to Feed
the World in 2050 (available at http://
www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/wsfs/
docs/Issues_papers/HLEF2050_Investment.
pdf).
74 S. Fan, 2008. Public expenditures,
growth, and poverty: lessons from
developing countries. Baltimore, MD,
Johns Hopkins University Press.

Key messages
NOTES for Annex
Table - table
1
Small import-dependent countries, especially in Africa,
were deeply affected by the food and economic crises.
Some large countries were able to insulate themselves from the
crisis through restrictive trade policies and functioning safety
nets, but trade insulation increased prices and volatility on
international markets.
High and volatile food prices are likely to continue.
Demand from consumers in rapidly growing economies will
increase, population continues to grow, and any further
growth in biofuels will place additional demands on the food
system. On the supply side, there are challenges due to
increasingly scarce natural resources in some regions, as well as
declining rates of yield growth for some commodities. Food
price volatility may increase due to stronger linkages between
agricultural and energy markets, as well as an increased
frequency of weather shocks.
Price volatility makes both smallholder farmers and poor
consumers increasingly vulnerable to poverty. Because
food represents a large share of farmer income and the budget
of poor consumers, large price changes have large effects on
real incomes. Thus, even short episodes of high prices for
consumers or low prices for farmers can cause productive
assets – land and livestock, for example – to be sold at low
prices, leading to potential poverty traps. In addition,
smallholder farmers are less likely to invest in measures to raise
productivity when price changes are unpredictable.
Large short-term price changes can have long-term
impacts on development. Changes in income due to price
swings can reduce children’s consumption of key nutrients
during the first 1 000 days of life from conception, leading to a
permanent reduction of their future earning capacity,
increasing the likelihood of future poverty and thus slowing the
economic development process.
High food prices worsen food insecurity in the short
term. The benefits go primarily to farmers with access to
sufficient land and other resources, while the poorest of the
poor buy more food than they produce. In addition to harming
the urban poor, high food prices also hurt many of the rural
poor, who are typically net food buyers. The diversity of
impacts within countries also points to a need for improved
data and policy analysis.

High food prices present incentives for increased
long-term investment in the agriculture sector, which can
contribute to improved food security in the longer term.
Domestic food prices increased substantially in most countries
during the 2006–08 world food crisis at both retail and
farmgate levels. Despite higher fertilizer prices, this led to a
strong supply response in many countries. It is essential to build
upon this short-term supply response with increased
investment in agriculture, including initiatives that target
smallholder farmers and help them to access markets, such as
Purchase for Progress (P4P).
Safety nets are crucial for alleviating food insecurity in
the short term, as well as for providing a foundation for
long-term development. In order to be effective at reducing
the negative consequences of price volatility, targeted
safety-net mechanisms must be designed in advance and in
consultation with the most vulnerable people.
A food-security strategy that relies on a combination of
increased productivity in agriculture, greater policy
predictability and general openness to trade will be more
effective than other strategies. Restrictive trade policies can
protect domestic prices from world market volatility, but these
policies can also result in increased domestic price volatility as a
result of domestic supply shocks, especially if government
policies are unpredictable and erratic. Government policies that
are more predictable and that promote participation by the
private sector in trade will generally decrease price volatility.
Investment in agriculture remains critical to sustainable
long-term food security. Such investment will improve the
competitiveness of domestic production, increase farmers’
profits and make food more affordable for the poor. For
example, cost-effective irrigation and improved practices and
seeds developed through agricultural research can reduce the
production risks facing farmers, especially smallholders, and
reduce price volatility. Private investment will form the bulk of
the needed investment, but public investment has a catalytic
role to play in supplying public goods that the private sector
will not provide. These investments should consider the rights
of existing users of land and related natural resources, benefit
local communities, promote food security and not cause undue
harm to the environment.

1.

World Food Summit goal: halve, between 1990–92 and 2015, the
number of undernourished people.

2.

Millennium Development Goal 1, target 1C: halve, between 1990 and
2015, the proportion of people who suffer from hunger. Indicator 1.9
Proportion of population below minimum level of dietary energy
consumption (undernourishment). The results are obtained following a
harmonized methodology and are based on the latest globally available
data averaged over three years. Some countries may have more recent
data which, if used, could lead to different estimates of the prevalence
of undernourishment and consequently of the progress achieved.

3.

4.

Latest report period refers to 2006–08 estimates and baseline refers
to 1990–92. For countries that did not exist in the baseline period, the
1990–92 proportion of undernourished is based on 1993–95 and the
number of undernourished is based on their 1990–92 population and
his proportion.
The colour indicator shows the progress that is projected to be
achieved by year 2015, if current trend continues:
Target already met or expected to be met by 2015
Progress insufficient to reach the target if prevailing trends
persist
No progress, or deterioration
Country has a proportion of undernourishment below
5 percent

Countries revise their official statistics regularly for the past as well as the
latest reported period. The same holds for population data of the United
Nations. Whenever this happens, FAO revises its estimates of
undernourishment accordingly. Therefore, users are advised to refer to
changes in estimates over time only within the same The State of Food
Insecurity in the World publication and refrain from comparing data
published in editions for different years.
Country composition of the special groupings: least-developed countries,
landlocked developing countries and small island developing states:
5.
Includes: Afghanistan, Angola, Bangladesh, Benin, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Haiti, Kiribati, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali,
Mauritania, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Niger, Rwanda, Samoa,
Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, Sudan, United Republic of Tanzania, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Uganda, Vanuatu, Yemen and Zambia.

6.

7

Includes: Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Central African Republic, Chad,
Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lesotho, Macedonia (The former Yugoslav Republic), Malawi, Mali,
Republic of Moldova, Mongolia, Nepal, Niger, Paraguay, Rwanda,
Swaziland, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Uzbekistan, Zambia and
Zimbabwe.
Includes: Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Cape
Verde, Comoros, Cuba, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Fiji Islands,
French Polynesia, Grenada, Guinea Bissau, Guyana , Haiti, Jamaica,
Kiribati, Maldives, Mauritius, Netherlands Antilles, New Caledonia,
Papua New Guinea, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent/Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Seychelles,
Solomon Islands, Suriname, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago and
Vanuatu.

Developing countries for which there were insufficient data are not included
in the table.
8.
In addition to the countries listed in the table, includes: Democratic
Rep. of the Congo, Somalia, Cape Verde, Comoros, Djibouti, Guinea
Bissau, Sao Tome and Principe, and Seychelles.
9.
In addition to the countries listed in the table includes: Afghanistan
and the Maldives.
10. In addition to the countries listed in the table, includes: Myanmar,
Brunei Darussalam and Timor-Leste.
11. In addition to the countries listed in the table, includes: Iraq and
Occupied Palestinian Territories.
12. In addition to the countries listed in the table, includes: Antigua and
Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Dominica, Grenada, Netherlands
Antilles, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia and Saint
Vincent/Grenadines.
13. In addition to the countries listed in the table includes Belize.
14. Includes: Fiji Islands, French Polynesia, Kiribati, New Caledonia, Papua
New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu.
KEY
—
Proportion less than 5 percent of undernourished
na
Data not available
ns
Not statistically significant
SOURCES
Total population: UN Population Prospects, 2008 revision.
Undernourishment: FAO estimates.

2011

2011

The State of

Food Insecurity in the World
How does international price volatility affect
domestic economies and food security?

The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2011 highlights the differential impacts
that the world food crisis of 2006-08 had on different countries, with the poorest
being most affected. While some large countries were able to deal with the worst
of the crisis, people in many small import-dependent countries experienced large
price increases that, even when only temporary, can have permanent effects on
their future earnings capacity and ability to escape poverty.
This year’s report focuses on the costs of food price volatility, as well as the
dangers and opportunities presented by high food prices. Climate change and an
increased frequency of weather shocks, increased linkages between energy and
agricultural markets due to growing demand for biofuels, and increased
financialization of food and agricultural commodities all suggest that price volatility
is here to stay. The report describes the effects of price volatility on food security
and presents policy options to reduce volatility in a cost-effective manner and to
manage it when it cannot be avoided. It will be important to provide improved
market information, create gender-sensitive safety nets that are designed in
advance and can be implemented quickly in times of crisis, and invest in agriculture
for the long-term to make it more productive and resilient to shocks.

The State of

Food Insecurity in the World
How does international price volatility affect
domestic economies and food security?

Cover photos: All photos are from the FAO Mediabase.

ISBN 978-92-5-106927-1

Copies of FAO publications can be requested from:
SALES AND MARKETING GROUP
Office of Knowledge Exchange, Research and Extension
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00153 Rome, Italy

E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
Fax: (+39) 06 57053360
Web site: http://www.fao.org/catalog/inter-e.htm

9

7 8 9 2 5 1

0 6 9 2 7 1
I2330E/1/07.11

2011

2011

The State of

Food Insecurity in the World
How does international price volatility affect
domestic economies and food security?

The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2011 highlights the differential impacts
that the world food crisis of 2006-08 had on different countries, with the poorest
being most affected. While some large countries were able to deal with the worst
of the crisis, people in many small import-dependent countries experienced large
price increases that, even when only temporary, can have permanent effects on
their future earnings capacity and ability to escape poverty.
This year’s report focuses on the costs of food price volatility, as well as the
dangers and opportunities presented by high food prices. Climate change and an
increased frequency of weather shocks, increased linkages between energy and
agricultural markets due to growing demand for biofuels, and increased
financialization of food and agricultural commodities all suggest that price volatility
is here to stay. The report describes the effects of price volatility on food security
and presents policy options to reduce volatility in a cost-effective manner and to
manage it when it cannot be avoided. It will be important to provide improved
market information, create gender-sensitive safety nets that are designed in
advance and can be implemented quickly in times of crisis, and invest in agriculture
for the long-term to make it more productive and resilient to shocks.

The State of

Food Insecurity in the World
How does international price volatility affect
domestic economies and food security?

Cover photos: All photos are from the FAO Mediabase.

ISBN 978-92-5-106927-1

Copies of FAO publications can be requested from:
SALES AND MARKETING GROUP
Office of Knowledge Exchange, Research and Extension
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00153 Rome, Italy

E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
Fax: (+39) 06 57053360
Web site: http://www.fao.org/catalog/inter-e.htm

9

7 8 9 2 5 1

0 6 9 2 7 1
I2330E/1/07.11

