Wor l d Eco no m i c a nd F i na nci a l S ur v e y s

World Economic Outlook
October 2017

Seeking Sustainable Growth
Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

I

N

T

E

R

N

A

T

I

O

N

A

L

M

O

N

E

T

A

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

R

Y

F

U

N

D

©2017 International Monetary Fund
Cover and Design: Luisa Menjivar and Jorge Salazar
Composition: AGS, An RR Donnelley Company
Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Joint Bank-Fund Library
Names: International Monetary Fund.
Title: World economic outlook (International Monetary Fund)
Other titles: WEO | Occasional paper (International Monetary Fund) | World economic and
financial surveys.
Description: Washington, DC : International Monetary Fund, 1980- | Semiannual | Some
issues also have thematic titles. | Began with issue for May 1980. | 1981-1984: Occasional
paper / International Monetary Fund, 0251-6365 | 1986-: World economic and financial
surveys, 0256-6877.
Identifiers: ISSN 0256-6877 (print) | ISSN 1564-5215 (online)
Subjects: LCSH: Economic development—Periodicals. | International economic relations—
Periodicals. | Debts, External—Periodicals. | Balance of payments—Periodicals. |
International finance—Periodicals. | Economic forecasting—Periodicals.
Classification: LCC HC10.W79
HC10.80
ISBN 978-1-48431-249-0 (paper)
978-1-48432-114-0 (Web PDF)
978-1-48432-112-6 (ePub)
978-1-48432-111-9 (Mobi)

The World Economic Outlook (WEO) is a survey by the IMF staff published twice a
year, in the spring and fall. The WEO is prepared by the IMF staff and has benefited
from comments and suggestions by Executive Directors following their discussion of the
report on September 21, 2017. The views expressed in this publication are those of the
IMF staff and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF’s Executive Directors
or their national authorities.
Recommended citation: International Monetary Fund. 2017. Seeking Sustainable
Growth: Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges. Washington, DC, October.

Publication orders may be placed online, by fax, or through the mail:
International Monetary Fund, Publication Services
P.O. Box 92780, Washington, DC 20090, USA
Tel.: (202) 623-7430 Fax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org
www.imfbookstore.org
www.elibrary.imf.org

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CONTENTS

Assumptions and Conventions

x

Further Information and Data

xi

Preface

xii

Foreword

xiii

Executive Summary

xv

Chapter 1. Global Prospects and Policies

1

Recent Developments and Prospects
The Forecast
Risks
Policy Priorities
Scenario Box 1. Impact of Recommended Policies in the Group of Twenty Economies
Box 1.1. Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies
Box 1.2. Will the Revival in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets Be Sustained?
Box 1.3. Emerging Market and Developing Economy Growth: Heterogeneity and Income
Convergence over the Forecast Horizon
Box 1.4. Macroeconomic Changes in Emerging Market Commodity Exporters
Box 1.5. Remittances and Consumption Smoothing
Special Feature: Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
References
Chapter 2. Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

2
10
22
25
35
37
42
45
50
55
59
70
73

Introduction
Wage Determination––A Primer
Advanced Economy Labor Markets: Surface Healing Masks Deeper Changes
Drivers of Recent Wage Dynamics
Summary and Policy Implications
Box 2.1. Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level
Box 2.2. Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence
Box 2.3. Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence
Annex 2.1. Country Coverage and Data
Annex 2.2. Empirical Methodologies
Annex 2.3. Empirical Results
References
Chapter 3: The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?
Introduction
Temperature and Precipitation: Historical Patterns and Projections
The Macroeconomic Impact of Weather Shocks
Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change
Long-Term Effects of Temperature Increase—A Model-Based Approach
Summary and Policy Implications
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

73
75
76
82
88
91
94
96
98
98
103
113
117
117
121
125
131
137
139
iii

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Box 3.1. The Growth Impact of Tropical Cyclones
Box 3.2. The Role of Policies in Coping with Weather Shocks: A Model-Based Analysis
Box 3.3. Strategies for Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: Selected Case Studies
Box 3.4. Coping with Weather Shocks: The Role of Financial Markets
Box 3.5. Historical Climate, Economic Development, and World Income Distribution
Box 3.6. Mitigating Climate Change
Annex 3.1. Data Sources and Country Groupings
Annex 3.2. Weather Shocks and Natural Disasters
Annex 3.3. Empirical Analysis of the Macroeconomic Effects of Weather Shocks and the Role of Policies
Annex 3.4. The Impact of Weather Changes and Natural Disasters on International Migration
Annex 3.5. Model-Based Analysis
Annex 3.6. Reduced Form Approach to Estimating Potential Long-Term Effects of Climate Change
References
Chapter 4. Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant?
Introduction
Spillovers from Fiscal Policy—A Conceptual Framework
Spillovers on Economic Activity: Empirical Evidence
The Transmission of Fiscal Shocks—Model-Based Analysis
Fiscal Reforms
Conclusions
Box 4.1. The Spillover Impact of US Government Spending Shocks on External Positions
Annex 4.1. Data
Annex 4.2. Empirical Strategy
Annex 4.3. Robustness Tests
References
Statistical Appendix

185
185
187
190
196
200
203
205
207
209
211
213
217

Assumptions
What’s New
Data and Conventions
Country Notes
Classification of Countries
General Features and Composition of Groups in the World Economic Outlook Classification
Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP,
Exports of Goods and Services, and Population, 2017
Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup
Table C. European Union
Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source of Export Earnings
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, and
Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries and Low-Income Developing Countries
Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods
Table G. Key Data Documentation
Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions Underlying the Projections for Selected Economies
List of Tables
Output (Tables A1–A4)
Inflation (Tables A5–A7)
Financial Policies (Table A8)
Foreign Trade (Table A9)
Current Account Transactions (Tables A10–A12)
Balance of Payments and External Financing (Table A13)
iv

142
145
148
151
154
156
159
161
161
173
174
176
177

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

217
218
219
219
220
220
221
222
222
223
224
226
227
237
242
249
254
255
257
264

CONTENTS﻿

Flow of Funds (Table A14)
Medium-Term Baseline Scenario (Table A15)

268
271

World Economic Outlook, Selected Topics

273

IMF Executive Board Discussion of the Outlook, October 2017

283

Tables
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections
14
Scenario Table 1. Assumed Policy Actions Relative to the WEO Baseline
36
Table 1.3.1. Correlates of Growth Projections, EMDEs, 2017–22
46
Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and
Unemployment
63
Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and
Unemployment
64
Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance,
and Unemployment
65
Annex Table 1.1.4. Commonwealth of Independent States Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current
Account Balance, and Unemployment
66
Annex Table 1.1.5. Middle East, North African Economies, Afghanistan, and Pakistan: Real GDP, Consumer
Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
67
Annex Table 1.1.6. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance,
and Unemployment
68
Annex Table 1.1.7. Summary of World Real per Capita Output
69
97
Table 2.3.1. Precrisis Financial Vulnerabilities and Postcrisis Labor Adjustments
Annex Table 2.1.1. Country Coverage
98
Annex Table 2.1.2. Data Sources
98
Annex Table 2.2.1. Aggregate Forces and Sectoral Exposures
102
Annex Table 2.3.1. Estimates of Wage Phillips Curves
103
104
Annex Table 2.3.2. Estimates of Wage Phillips Curves with Alternative Measures
Annex Table 2.3.3. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Involuntary
Part-Time Employment Share by Country Group
106
Annex Table 2.3.4. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Involuntary
Part-Time Employment Share: Full Sample and Countries with Unemployment Rates
106
Lower than 2000–07 Average
Annex Table 2.3.5. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Involuntary
Part-Time Employment Share: Countries with Unemployment Rates Moderately Higher and
Appreciably Higher than 2000–07 Average
107
Annex Table 2.3.6. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Temporary Contract
Employment Share: Full Sample and Countries with Unemployment Rates Lower than
107
2000–07 Average
Annex Table 2.3.7. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Temporary Contract
Employment Share: Countries with Unemployment Rates Moderately Higher and
108
Appreciably Higher than 2000–07 Average
Annex Table 2.3.8. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Structural Variables
109
Annex Table 2.3.9. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Structural Variables:
110
Excluding 2008 and 2009
Annex Table 2.3.10. Drivers of Involuntary Part-Time Employment Share, Aggregate Analysis
110
Annex Table 2.3.11. Drivers of Sectoral Nominal Wage Growth
111
Annex Table 2.3.12. Drivers of Sectoral Part-Time Employment Shares
111
Annex Table 2.3.13. Drivers of Nominal Wage Growth, Employment Growth, and
Part-Time Employment
113
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

v

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table 3.1.1. Characteristics of the Average Tropical Cyclone by Country Group
Table 3.1.2. Effect of Weather and Wind Shocks on Economic Activity
Table 3.5.1. Effect of Historical Climate on Current Real Output
Annex Table 3.1.1. Data Sources
Annex Table 3.1.2. Country and Territory Groups
Annex Table 3.2.1. Effect of Weather Shocks on Natural Disasters, 1990–2014
Annex Table 3.3.1. Effect of Weather Shocks on Output
Annex Table 3.3.2. Effect of Weather Shocks on Sectoral Output
Annex Table 3.3.3. Effect of Weather Shocks on Productivity, Capital, and Labor
Annex Table 3.3.4. Role of Policy Buffers
Annex Table 3.3.5. Role of Structural Policies and Institutions
Annex Table 3.3.6. Role of Development: Evidence from Subnational Data
Annex Table 3.4.1. Effect of Weather Shocks and Natural Disasters on Emigration, 1980–2015
Annex Table 3.5.1. Parameterization of the Debt, Investment, and Growth Model
Annex Table 4.1.1. Data Sources for Quarterly Fiscal Data by Source Country
Annex Table 4.1.2. Data Sources for Recipient Countries
Annex Table 4.1.3. Recipient Countries in Sample

142
143
154
159
160
162
164
167
168
170
171
172
173
175
207
208
208

Online Tables
Table B1. Advanced Economies: Unemployment, Employment, and Real GDP per Capita
Table B2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
Table B3. Advanced Economies: Hourly Earnings, Productivity, and Unit Labor Costs in Manufacturing
Table B4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices
Table B5. Summary of Fiscal and Financial Indicators
Table B6. Advanced Economies: General and Central Government Net Lending/Borrowing and
General Government Net Lending/Borrowing Excluding Social Security Schemes
Table B7. Advanced Economies: General Government Structural Balances
Table B8. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government Net Lending/Borrowing
and Overall Fiscal Balance
Table B9. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government Net Lending/Borrowing
Table B10. Selected Advanced Economies: Exchange Rates
Table B11. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Broad Money Aggregates
Table B12. Advanced Economies: Export Volumes, Import Volumes, and Terms of Trade in
Goods and Services
Table B13. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: Total Trade in Goods
Table B14. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Source of Export Earnings:
Total Trade in Goods
Table B15. Summary of Current Account Transactions
Table B16. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Summary of External Debt and Debt Service
Table B17. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: External Debt by Maturity
Table B18. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Analytical Criteria:
External Debt by Maturity
Table B19. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Ratio of External Debt to GDP
Table B20. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Debt-Service Ratios
Table B21. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, Medium-Term Baseline Scenario:
Selected Economic Indicators
Figures
Figure 1.1. Global Activity Indicators
Figure 1.2. Global Fixed Investment and Trade
Figure 1.3. Commodity Prices
Figure 1.4. Global Inflation
vi

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

2
3
3
4

CONTENTS﻿

Figure 1.5. Advanced Economies: Monetary and Financial Market Conditions
Figure 1.6. Real Effective Exchange Rate Changes, November 2016–September 2017
Figure 1.7. Emerging Market Economies: Equity Markets and Credits
Figure 1.8. Emerging Market Economies: Interest Rates
Figure 1.9. Emerging Market Economies: Capital Flows
Figure 1.10. Revisions to 2017 Growth and 2016 Output Gaps
Figure 1.11. Emerging Markets: Terms-of-Trade Windfall Gains and Losses
Figure 1.12. GDP Growth, 1999–2022
Figure 1.13. Fiscal Indicators
Figure 1.14. Global Current Account Balances
Figure 1.15. Real Exchange Rates and Current Account Balances in Relation to Economic Fundamentals
Figure 1.16. Net International Investment Positions
Figure 1.17. Geopolitical Risk Index
Figure 1.18. Risks to the Global Outlook
Figure 1.19. Recession and Deflation Risks
Figure 1.20. Advanced Economy Output Gaps, 2017
Figure 1.21. Emerging Market and Developing Economy Output Gaps, 2017
Figure 1.22. Per Capita Real GDP Growth across Low-Income Developing Countries
Scenario Figure 1. Group of Twenty Macro Scenario
Figure 1.1.1. Population Shares by Age Group and Gender
Figure 1.1.2. Labor Force Participation Rates by Age Group and Gender
Figure 1.1.3. Decomposition of Change in Labor Force Participation Rate, 2007–16
Figure 1.1.4. Changes in Labor Force Participation, Select Advanced Economies, 2007–16
Figure 1.1.5. Changes in Labor Force Participation Rates for the 25–54 Age Group by Gender,
Select Advanced Economies
Figure 1.1.6. Convergence in Female Labor Force Participation Rates
Figure 1.2.1. Capital Flows to Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Figure 1.2.2. China: Reserves and Capital Flows
Figure 1.2.3. Latest Capital Flows Trends and Prospects
Figure 1.3.1. Per Capital Real GDP Growth across Country Groups
Figure 1.3.2. Per Capita Real GDP Growth, Emerging Market and Developing Economies, by Region
Figure 1.3.3. EMDEs’ per Capita Real GDP Growth Differentials vis-à-vis Advanced Economies:
1995–2016 versus 2017–22
Figure 1.3.4. Distribution of EMDE per Capita Real GDP Growth Differentials with Respect to
Advanced Economies
Figure 1.3.5. Distribution of EMDE per Capita Real GDP Growth Differentials with Respect to
Advanced Economies, by Type of Export Earnings and Region
Figure 1.3.6. Distribution of EMDE Population by per Capita Real GDP Growth Rate
Figure 1.3.7. Projected per Capita Real Growth Rates and 2011 Real Levels, AEs and EMDEs
Figure 1.4.1. Commodity Prices
Figure 1.4.2. Exchange Rate Regimes of Commodity-Exporting Emerging Market and Developing
Economies
Figure 1.4.3. Commodity Terms of Trade
Figure 1.4.4. Evolution of Exchange Rates
Figure 1.4.5. Net Export Adjustment, 2013–16
Figure 1.4.6. Fiscal Indicators
Figure 1.4.7. Change in per Capita GDP Growth and Inflation in Fuel Exporters, Conditional on CToT
Figure 1.5.1. Net Remittances as a Share of Output, 2015
Figure 1.5.2. Financial Integration
Figure 1.5.3. Smoothing Effects of Remittances
Figure 1.5.4. Contribution of Remittances to Consumption Risk Sharing
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

6
7
7
8
8
9
11
11
12
20
21
21
24
25
26
27
29
32
35
37
38
38
39
40
40
42
43
43
45
45
47
47
48
48
49
50
51
51
52
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
vii

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments
Figure 2.1. Distribution of Labor Market Indicators
Figure 2.2. Distribution of Nominal Wage Growth and Correlation with Changes in the
Unemployment Rate
Figure 2.3. Job Attributes: Involuntary Part-Time Employment
Figure 2.4. Job Attributes: Temporary Contracts
Figure 2.5. Job Attributes: Hours per Worker
Figure 2.6. Average Nominal Wage Growth, 2009–16, Actual versus Imputed Using 2008 Sectoral
Employment Shares
Figure 2.7. Changes in Labor Market Indicators, Actual versus Imputed Using 2008 Sectoral
Employment Shares
Figure 2.8. Job Attributes and Changes in Sectoral Employment Shares, 2008–16
Figure 2.9. Effects on Growth of Compensation per Hour: Panel Estimation
Figure 2.10. Effects on Growth of Compensation per Hour: Country-by-Country Estimation,
Cross-Country Dispersion
Figure 2.11. Effects of Involuntary Part-Time Employment on Growth of Compensation per
Hour, 2000–16
Figure 2.12. Decomposition of Wage Dynamics, 2000–16
Figure 2.13. Year Fixed Effects and Common Drivers, 2000–16
Figure 2.14. Changes in Growth Expectations and Labor Market Institutions
Figure 2.15. Long-Term Drivers of Labor Market Dynamics
Figure 2.16. Effects on Involuntary Part-Time Employment Share, Aggregate Analysis
Figure 2.1.1. Evolution of Skill Premiums in the United States
Figure 2.1.2. Skill Premiums and Changes in Skill Premiums in European Economies
Figure 2.1.3. Nominal Wage Growth by Sector and Skill Group
Figure 2.1.4. Employment Shares by Skill
Figure 2.1.5. Employment Shares by Skill and Changes in Hours per Worker
Figure 2.2.1. Changes in Employment Shares
Figure 2.2.2. Changes in Employment Shares, 2007–14
Figure 2.2.3. Wage Cuts and Freezes, 2014
Figure 2.3.1. Estimated Nominal Wage Growth and Employment Growth Differences Based on
Uncertainty and Growth Expectations
Figure 2.3.2. Wage and Employment Growth by Debt Maturity in 2008
Annex Figure 2.2.1. Distribution of Real Compensation Growth Measures
Annex Figure 2.2.2. Growth of Real Compensation per Hour and Unemployment Rates
Annex Figure 2.2.3. Factors Associated with Nominal Wage Growth
Annex Figure 2.2.4. Effects of Involuntary Part-Time Employment on Compensation
and Wages, 2000–16
Annex Figure 2.2.5. Correlations between Aggregate Wage Growth and Two-Quarter-Lagged
Public Wage Growth
Annex Figure 2.3.1. Decomposition of Wage Dynamics, 2000–16
Annex Figure 2.3.2. Decomposition of Sectoral Wage Dynamics, 2000–15
Annex Figure 2.3.3. Effects on Part-Time Employment Share, Sectoral Analysis
Figure 3.1. Average Global Temperature
Figure 3.2. Increase in Average Global Temperature and Contributions of Key Factors
Figure 3.3. Temperature and Precipitation across Broad Country Groups
Figure 3.4. Annual CO2 Emissions across Broad Country Groups
Figure 3.5. Temperature and Precipitation Projections under the RCP 8.5 Scenario
Figure 3.6. Natural Disasters: Historical and Projected Monthly Probability of Occurrence
Figure 3.7. Effect of Temperature Increase on Real per Capita Output
Figure 3.8. Effect of Temperature Increase on Real per Capita Output across the Globe
viii

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

59
77
78
79
79
80
81
81
82
84
84
86
86
87
88
89
89
91
92
92
93
93
94
95
95
96
96
99
99
100
100
101
105
112
112
118
121
122
122
124
125
126
127

CONTENTS﻿

Figure 3.9. Effect of Temperature Increase on Sectoral Output Estimated at the Temperature of the
Median Low-Income Developing Country
Figure 3.10. Effect of Temperature Increase on Productivity, Capital, and Labor Input Estimated
at the Temperature of the Median Low-Income Developing Country
Figure 3.11. Effect of Temperature Increase on Real per Capita Output Estimated at the Temperature
of the Median Low-Income Developing Country over Time
Figure 3.12. Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: A Toolkit
Figure 3.13. Role of Policy Buffers
Figure 3.14. Role of Structural Policies and Institutions
Figure 3.15. Role of Development: Evidence from Subnational Data
Figure 3.16. Effect of Temperature and Natural Disasters on International Migration
Figure 3.17. Long-Term Impact of Temperature Increase for a Representative Low-Income
Developing Country: Model Simulations
Figure 3.18. Vulnerability to Temperature Increase and Adaption Prospects
Figure 3.1.1. Effect of Tropical Cyclone Exposure on Real GDP per Capita
Figure 3.1.2. Cumulative Effect of Average Tropical Cyclone on Real GDP per Capita after Seven Years
Figure 3.2.1. Role of Policies: A Model-Based Analysis
Figure 3.4.1. Insurance Penetration: Non-Life Insurance Premium
Figure 3.4.2. Catastrophe Bond Market
Figure 3.4.3. Temperature Shocks and Stock Price Predictability: Food and Beverages Sector
Figure 3.6.1. Effectiveness of Mitigation Policies in China
Annex Figure 3.3.1. Effect of Temperature Increase on Real per Capita Output across the Globe,
with Countries Rescaled in Proportion to Their Projected Population as of 2100
Annex Figure 3.6.1. The Long-Term Impact of Temperature Increase on Real per Capita Output
across the Globe
Figure 4.1. Output Gap in Selected Countries
Figure 4.2. The Transmission of a Fiscal Shock
Figure 4.3. Tracking Tax Shocks in the United States
Figure 4.4. Dynamic Responses of Recipient Countries’ Output to Fiscal Shocks
Figure 4.5. Spillovers of Fiscal Shocks on Recipient Countries’ Output
Figure 4.6. Dynamic Responses of Components of Recipient Countries’ Output to a Fiscal Shock
Figure 4.7. Spillovers under Various Economic and Policy Conditions
Figure 4.8. Dynamic Responses of Components of Recipient Countries’ Output under
Normal Times and Effective Lower Bound in Recipient Countries
Figure 4.9. Dynamic Responses of Recipient Countries’ Output to US Spending Shock under
Various Exchange Rate Regimes
Figure 4.10. Impact of Fiscal Shocks on Global GDP Based on Various Instruments
Figure 4.11. Spillovers from US Fiscal Shocks with and without Monetary Accommodation
Figure 4.12. Regional GDP Impact of Government Spending Shocks from the United States,
Europe, and China
Figure 4.13. Dynamic Responses to a US Government Spending Shock
Figure 4.14. Spillovers from US Spending Shock with and without a US Term-Premium Increase
Figure 4.15. Spillovers from Corporate Income Tax Reduction Financed by an Offsetting
Increase in Value-Added Tax
Figure 4.16. Spillovers from Increase in Government Investment in Five Major Economies
Figure 4.1.1. Response of Recipient Countries’ Trade Balance and Real Exchange Rate vis-à-vis US Dollar
Annex Figure 4.3.1. Effects of Spending Shock and Tax Shock on Recipient Countries’ Output:
Comparison with Panel Vector Autoregression
Annex Figure 4.3.2. Effects of Spending and Tax Shock on Recipient Countries’ Output: Forecast Errors
Annex Figure 4.3.3. Effects of US Tax Shock on Recipient Countries’ Output: Comparison with US
Narrative Tax Shock, 1995–2007
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

128
130
131
132
134
134
135
136
138
141
144
144
145
151
152
152
157
165
177
186
188
191
192
193
193
194
195
196
197
198
199
199
200
201
203
205
211
212
213
ix

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY

ASSUMPTIONS AND CONVENTIONS

A number of assumptions have been adopted for the projections presented in the World Economic Outlook (WEO).
It has been assumed that real effective exchange rates remained constant at their average levels during July 20 to August
17, 2017, except for those for the currencies participating in the European exchange rate mechanism II (ERM II),
which are assumed to have remained constant in nominal terms relative to the euro; that established policies of national
authorities will be maintained (for specific assumptions about fiscal and monetary policies for selected economies, see
Box A1 in the Statistical Appendix); that the average price of oil will be $50.28 a barrel in 2017 and $50.17 a barrel in
2018 and will remain unchanged in real terms over the medium term; that the six-month London interbank offered
rate (LIBOR) on US dollar deposits will average 1.4 percent in 2017 and 1.9 percent in 2018; that the three-month
euro deposit rate will average –0.3 percent in 2017 and 2018; and that the six-month Japanese yen deposit rate will
yield on average 0.1 percent in 2017 and 0.2 percent in 2018. These are, of course, working hypotheses rather than
forecasts, and the uncertainties surrounding them add to the margin of error that would in any event be involved in the
projections. The estimates and projections are based on statistical information available through September 22, 2017.
The following conventions are used throughout the WEO:
. . . to indicate that data are not available or not applicable;
– 	between years or months (for example, 2016–17 or January–June) to indicate the years or months
covered, including the beginning and ending years or months; and
/
between years or months (for example, 2016/17) to indicate a fiscal or financial year.
“Billion” means a thousand million; “trillion” means a thousand billion.
“Basis points” refers to hundredths of 1 percentage point (for example, 25 basis points are equivalent to ¼ of 1
percentage point).
Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a few countries that use fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in
the Statistical Appendix, which lists the economies with exceptional reporting periods for national accounts and
government finance data for each country.
For some countries, the figures for 2016 and earlier are based on estimates rather than actual outturns. Please
refer to Table G in the Statistical Appendix, which lists the latest actual outturns for the indicators in the national
accounts, prices, government finance, and balance of payments indicators for each country.
What is new in this publication:
• Data for Somalia are included in the emerging market and developing economies group composites. Somalia is
classified as a member of the Middle East and North Africa region.
• Starting with the October 2017 WEO, the real GDP per capita data in Statistical Tables A1, B1, and B2 are
shown at purchasing power parity. This differs from the treatment of these data in the April 2017 WEO and
earlier issues, in which the data were shown in local national currency.
In the tables and figures, the following conventions apply:
• If no source is listed on tables and figures, data are drawn from the WEO database.
• When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
• Minor discrepancies between sums of constituent figures and totals shown reflect rounding.
As used in this report, the terms “country” and “economy” do not in all cases refer to a territorial entity that is
a state as understood by international law and practice. As used here, the term also covers some territorial entities
that are not states but for which statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
Composite data are provided for various groups of countries organized according to economic characteristics or
region. Unless noted otherwise, country group composites represent calculations based on 90 percent or more of
the weighted group data.
The boundaries, colors, denominations, and any other information shown on the maps do not imply, on the
part of the International Monetary Fund, any judgment on the legal status of any territory or any endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.
x

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY

FURTHER INFORMATION AND DATA

This version of the World Economic Outlook (WEO) is available in full through the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.
imf.org) and the IMF website (www.imf.org). Accompanying the publication on the IMF website is a larger compilation of data from the WEO database than is included in the report itself, including files containing the series most
frequently requested by readers. These files may be downloaded for use in a variety of software packages.
The data appearing in the WEO are compiled by the IMF staff at the time of the WEO exercises. The historical data and projections are based on the information gathered by the IMF country desk officers in the context
of their missions to IMF member countries and through their ongoing analysis of the evolving situation in each
country. Historical data are updated on a continual basis as more information becomes available, and structural
breaks in data are often adjusted to produce smooth series with the use of splicing and other techniques. IMF
staff estimates continue to serve as proxies for historical series when complete information is unavailable. As a
result, WEO data can differ from those in other sources with official data, including the IMF’s International
Financial Statistics.
The WEO data and metadata provided are “as is” and “as available,” and every effort is made to ensure their
timeliness, accuracy, and completeness, but it cannot be guaranteed. When errors are discovered, there is a concerted effort to correct them as appropriate and feasible. Corrections and revisions made after publication are
incorporated into the electronic editions available from the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.imf.org) and on the IMF
website (www.imf.org). All substantive changes are listed in detail in the online tables of contents.
For details on the terms and conditions for usage of the WEO database, please refer to the IMF Copyright and
Usage website (www.imf.org/external/terms.htm).
Inquiries about the content of the WEO and the WEO database should be sent by mail, fax, or online forum
(telephone inquiries cannot be accepted):
World Economic Studies Division
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431, USA
Fax: (202) 623-6343
Online Forum: www.imf.org/weoforum

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

xi

PREFACE

The analysis and projections contained in the World Economic Outlook are integral elements of the IMF’s surveillance of economic developments and policies in its member countries, of developments in international financial
markets, and of the global economic system. The survey of prospects and policies is the product of a comprehensive interdepartmental review of world economic developments, which draws primarily on information the IMF
staff gathers through its consultations with member countries. These consultations are carried out in particular by
the IMF’s area departments—namely, the African Department, Asia and Pacific Department, European Department, Middle East and Central Asia Department, and Western Hemisphere Department—together with the
Strategy, Policy, and Review Department, the Monetary and Capital Markets Department, and the Fiscal Affairs
Department.
The analysis in this report was coordinated in the Research Department under the general direction of Maurice
Obstfeld, Economic Counsellor and Director of Research. The project was directed by Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti,
Deputy Director, Research Department; Oya Celasun, Division Chief, Research Department; and Helge Berger,
Assistant Director, Research Department and Head of the IMF’s Spillover Task Force.
The primary contributors to this report were Sebastian Acevedo, Patrick Blagrave, Christian Bogmans,
Francesco Grigoli, Giang Ho, Gee Hee Hong, Zsóka Kóczán, Ksenia Koloskova, Toh Kuan, Weicheng Lian,
Akito Matsumoto, Mico Mrkaic, Malhar Nabar, Natalija Novta, Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro, Evgenia Pugacheva,
Petia Topalova, and Esteban Vesperoni.
Other contributors include JaeBin Ahn, Gavin Asdorian, Manoj Atolia, Claudio Baccianti, Kimberly Beaton,
Jared Bebee, Felicia Belostecinic, John C. Bluedorn, Luis Catão, Eugenio Cerutti, Angela Espiritu, Rachel Yuting
Fan, Alan Xiaochen Feng, Bertrand Gruss, Meron Haile, Mahnaz Hemmati, Benjamin Hilgenstock, Ava Yeabin
Hong, Benjamin Hunt, Hao Jiang, Christopher Johns, Sung Eun Jung, Alimata Kini-Kaboré, Lama Kiyasseh,
Robin Koepke, Jungjin Lee, Yiqun Li, Ricardo Marto, Trevor Charles Meadows, Joannes Mongardini, Susanna
Mursula, Cynthia Nyanchama Nyakeri, Emory Oakes, Ian Parry, Adina Popescu, Daniel Rivera Greenwood, Ippei
Shibata, Kadir Tanyeri, Nicholas Tong, Jilun Xing, Yuan Zeng, Qiaoqiao Zhang, and Huiyuan Zhao.
Joseph Procopio from the Communications Department led the editorial team for the report, with production
and editorial support from Michael Harrup, Christine Ebrahimzadeh, and Linda Kean and editorial assistance
from James Unwin, Lucy Scott Morales, Sherrie Brown, and Vector Talent Resources.
The analysis has benefited from comments and suggestions by staff members from other IMF departments, as
well as by Executive Directors following their discussion of the report on September 21, 2017. However, both projections and policy considerations are those of the IMF staff and should not be attributed to Executive Directors or
to their national authorities.

xii

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

FOREWORD

T

he global cyclical upswing that began
midway through 2016 continues to gather
strength. Only a year and a half ago, the
world economy faced stalling growth and
financial market turbulence. The picture now is very
different, with accelerating growth in Europe, Japan,
China, and the United States. Financial conditions
remain buoyant across the world, and financial
markets seem to be expecting little turbulence going
forward, even as the Federal Reserve continues its
monetary normalization process and the European
Central Bank inches up to its own.
These positive developments give good cause for
greater confidence, but neither policymakers nor markets should be lulled into complacency. A closer look
suggests that the global recovery may not be sustainable—not all countries are participating, inflation often
remains below target with weak wage growth, and the
medium-term outlook still disappoints in many parts
of the world. The recovery is also vulnerable to serious risks. Financial markets that ignore these risks are
susceptible to disruptive repricing, and are sending a
misleading message to policymakers. Policymakers, in
turn, need to maintain a longer-term vision and seize
the current opportunity to implement the structural
and fiscal reforms needed for greater resilience, productivity, and investment. The possibility that they don’t—
governments far too often wait for crises to push them
into decisive action—is itself a source of risks to the
outlook, as well as a barrier to more inclusive and
sustainable growth. Recent economic progress provides
a global environment of opportunity, and policymakers
should not let their chance go to waste.
The current recovery is incomplete in some important ways: within countries, across countries, and over
time.
Within countries. Even as negative output gaps close
across the advanced economies, growth in nominal
and real wages remains weak compared with past
recoveries. Weak wage growth is one source of the surprisingly weak inflation that itself is a source of concern, as it leaves nominal interest rates low and makes
encounters with the effective lower bound, the point

at which central banks can no longer lower interest
rates, more likely. Chapter 2 of this World Economic
Outlook report studies the recent surprisingly slow
growth of nominal wages, which reinforces a longer trend of stagnant median wages, rising income
inequality, and job polarization such that middle-skill
but well-paying jobs have become increasingly scarce.
Those developments have stoked considerable popular
anti-globalization backlash—one significant threat to
the world economy—although technological developments and government policies together have played
larger roles in increasing income inequality, and fears
of faster automation are a current cause of anxiety.
Emerging markets have faced similar pressures in the
face of trade liberalization and technological change,
but growth has in many cases lifted all deciles of their
income distributions and attitudes toward trade’s
effects on labor markets remain largely optimistic.
Across countries. The current upswing reaches more
broadly than any in a decade—roughly 75 percent of
the world economy, measured by GDP at purchasing
power parity—is sharing in the acceleration. But that
means the glass is 25 percent empty, implying a drag
on world growth and a potential source of destabilizing
political shocks. Emerging and low-income commodity exporters, especially energy exporters, continue to
struggle, as do several countries experiencing civil or
political unrest, mostly in the Middle East, North and
sub-Saharan Africa, and Latin America. And many of
these same countries are the ones that are also most
exposed to the negative impacts of climate change—
already being felt via more frequent extreme weather
events in some regions, such as heat waves and heavy
precipitation. Chapter 3 focuses on the economic costs
of climate change and the need for adaptation investments in low-income countries. Advanced economies
will not be immune to future climate developments,
however—through either direct impacts in some
advanced regions, such as the coastal United States, or
the spillovers from mass migrations and geopolitical
instability emanating from poorer countries.
Over time. Behind recent positive growth developments, longer-term trend per capita growth rates in

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

xiii

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

many economies will be lower than trend growth rates
of the past. In particular, most advanced economies
face medium-term growth rates significantly lower
than in the decade before the global financial crisis
of 2007–09. The reasons behind these slowdowns
differ across countries. For some economies, notably
China’s, declining long-term growth is a natural result
of rebalancing and convergence. For emerging commodity exporters, which benefited from China’s own
rapid manufacturing growth in years past, permanently lower export prices call for new growth models.
For advanced economies, expected slow productivity
growth and aging workforces play major roles. Lower
trend per capita growth rates can be problematic for
several reasons: they make it harder for the poor to
raise their living standards; they raise the pain of reallocating resources in the face of economic changes;
they deter productivity-enhancing investment; they
harm the sustainability of publicly funded social safety
nets; and they feed political resentment by undermining hopes for the future and beliefs about the fairness
of economic outcomes. In turn, these forces could
derail the baseline forecast.
The preceding gaps in the recovery challenge
policymakers to action—action that should take place
now, while times are good. Needed structural reforms
differ across countries, but all countries have ample
room for measures that would raise economic resilience along with potential output. For some countries
where output gaps have closed, the time has come to
think about gradual fiscal consolidation, to reduce
swollen public debt levels and create buffers to be
used in the next recession. Such actions could entail
adverse spillovers abroad, as discussed in Chapter
4. Countries with more fiscal space can, however,
offset the reduction in global demand—for example,

xiv

through much-needed productive infrastructure
investment or through fiscal spending that supports
structural reforms. This global fiscal package can also
help reduce excess global imbalances.
Critically important to inclusive and sustainable
growth is investment in people at all life-cycle stages,
but especially the young. Better education, training,
and retraining can both ease labor market adjustment
to secular economic transformation—coming from all
sources, not only trade—and raise productivity. In the
short term, the excessive youth unemployment that
afflicts many countries urgently deserves attention.
Investing in human capital should help to push labor’s
income share upward, contrary to the broad trend of
recent decades—but governments should also consider
correcting distortions that may have reduced workers’
bargaining power excessively. In sum, policy should
promote an environment conducive to sustainable real
wage growth.
Numerous global problems require multilateral
action. Priorities for mutually beneficial cooperation include strengthening the global trading system,
further improving financial regulation, enhancing the
global financial safety net, reducing international tax
avoidance, fighting famine and infectious diseases,
mitigating greenhouse gas emissions before they create
more irreversible damage, and helping poorer countries, which are not themselves substantial emitters,
adapt to climate change. If the strength of the current upswing makes the moment ideal for domestic
reforms, its breadth makes multilateral cooperation
opportune. Policymakers should act while the window
of opportunity is open.
Maurice Obstfeld
Economic Counsellor

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The global upswing in economic activity is strengthening.
Global growth, which in 2016 was the weakest since
the global financial crisis at 3.2 percent, is projected
to rise to 3.6 percent in 2017 and to 3.7 percent in
2018. The growth forecasts for both 2017 and 2018
are 0.1 percentage point stronger compared with the
April 2017 World Economic Outlook (WEO) forecast.
Broad-based upward revisions in the euro area, Japan,
emerging Asia, emerging Europe, and Russia—where
growth outcomes in the first half of 2017 were better
than expected—more than offset downward revisions
for the United States and the United Kingdom.
But the recovery is not complete: while the baseline
outlook is strengthening, growth remains weak in many
countries, and inflation is below target in most advanced
economies. Commodity exporters, especially of fuel, are
particularly hard hit as their adjustment to a sharp
stepdown in foreign earnings continues. And while shortterm risks are broadly balanced, medium-term risks are
still tilted to the downside. The welcome cyclical pickup
in global activity thus provides an ideal window of
opportunity to tackle the key policy challenges—namely
to boost potential output while ensuring its benefits are
broadly shared, and to build resilience against downside risks. A renewed multilateral effort is also needed
to tackle the common challenges of an integrated global
economy.
The global pickup in activity that started in the
second half of 2016 gained further momentum in
the first half of 2017. Growth is projected to rise over
this year and next in emerging market and developing economies, supported by improved external
factors—a benign global financial environment and
a recovery in advanced economies. Growth in China
and other parts of emerging Asia remains strong, and
the still-difficult conditions faced by several commodity exporters in Latin America, the Commonwealth
of Independent States, and sub-Saharan Africa show
some signs of improvement. In advanced economies,
the notable 2017 growth pickup is broad based, with
stronger activity in the United States and Canada,
the euro area, and Japan. Prospects for medium-term
growth are more subdued, however, as negative output

gaps shrink (leaving less scope for cyclical improvement) and demographic factors and weak productivity
weigh on potential growth.
Changes to aggregate growth forecasts relative
to the April 2017 WEO are generally positive but
modest, with some meaningful changes for specific
country groups and individual countries.
• In line with stronger-than-expected momentum in
the first half of 2017, the forecast sees a stronger
rebound in advanced economies in 2017 (to 2.2
percent versus 2.0 percent foreseen in April), driven
by stronger growth in the euro area, Japan, and
Canada. In contrast, compared with the April 2017
WEO forecast, growth has been marked down
for 2017 in the United Kingdom and for both
2017 and 2018 in the United States, implying a
0.1 percentage-point aggregate growth downgrade
for advanced economies in 2018. Activity in the
United Kingdom slowed more than anticipated
in the first half of 2017; as for the United States,
given the significant policy uncertainty, the forecast
now uses a baseline assumption of unchanged policies, whereas in April it assumed a fiscal stimulus
driven by then-anticipated tax cuts.
• Growth prospects for emerging and developing
economies are marked up by 0.1 percentage point
for both 2017 and 2018 relative to April, primarily
owing to a stronger growth projection for China.
The country’s 2017 forecast (6.8 percent, against
6.6 percent in April) reflects stronger growth
outturns in the first half of 2017 as well as more
buoyant external demand. For 2018, the revision
mainly reflects an expectation that the authorities
will maintain a sufficiently expansionary policy mix
to meet their target of doubling real GDP between
2010 and 2020. Growth forecasts have also been
marked up for emerging Europe for 2017, reflecting stronger growth in Turkey and other countries
in the region, for Russia for 2017 and 2018, and
Brazil in 2017.
Financial market sentiment has generally been
strong, with continued gains in equity markets in

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

xv

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

both advanced and emerging market economies.
Given current expectations of a more gradual pace of
monetary policy normalization compared with March,
US long-term interest rates have declined by some 25
basis points since then, and the dollar has depreciated
by more than 5 percent in real effective terms, with a
commensurate real appreciation of the euro. Despite
expectations of more robust global demand going
forward, commodity prices have remained low, with oil
prices reflecting stronger-than-anticipated supply.
Headline consumer price inflation has softened
since the spring, as the boost to prices from the oil
price recovery of 2016 has faded and the decline in oil
prices in recent months has started to exert downward
pressure. Despite stronger growth in domestic demand,
core inflation has generally remained muted across
advanced economies, reflecting still-weak wage growth
(Chapter 2). Inflation is likely to rise only gradually
toward central bank targets. Across emerging and
developing economies, the waning of pass-through
effects from earlier currency depreciations against the
US dollar, and in some cases recent appreciations, have
helped moderate core inflation rates.
Short-term risks are broadly balanced. On the
positive side, the recovery could strengthen further,
supported by strong consumer and business confidence
and benign financial conditions. At the same time, in
an environment of high policy uncertainty and geopolitical tensions, policy missteps—which the baseline
assumes will be avoided—could take a toll on market
confidence, resulting in tighter financial conditions and
weaker asset prices.
Risks to growth in the medium term are still skewed
to the downside, owing to several potential hazards:
• A more rapid and sizable tightening of global financial
conditions. This could take the form of higher longterm interest rates in the United States and elsewhere, triggered by faster-than-expected monetary
policy normalization or a decompression of term
premia, with adverse repercussions for vulnerable
economies. Monetary policy tightening in the euro
area, if it had to come while the recovery in prices
and growth is still lagging in highly indebted member economies, could pose risks for these economies if they have not undertaken the needed fiscal
adjustment and implemented structural reforms
to boost supply potential. Tighter global financial
conditions could also result from a sharp decrease in
global risk appetite from its currently strong levels,

xvi

•

•

•

•

•

which would take a toll on macroeconomic activity
through weaker confidence, lower asset valuations,
and wider risk premia.
Financial turmoil in emerging market economies. The
upward revision to China’s growth forecasts reflects
a slower rebalancing of activity toward services and
consumption, a higher projected debt trajectory, and
diminished fiscal space. Unless the Chinese authorities counter the associated risks by accelerating their
recent encouraging efforts to curb the expansion of
credit, these factors imply a heightened probability
of a sharp growth slowdown in China, with adverse
international repercussions. Following a period of
abundant credit supply, a sudden tightening of
global financial conditions (and an associated US
dollar appreciation) could expose financial fragilities in some emerging markets, imposing strains on
economies with US dollar pegs, high leverage, and
balance sheet mismatches.
Persistently low inflation in advanced economies. If
domestic demand were to falter, it could lead to
a decline in medium-term inflation expectations,
prolonging and reinforcing the weakness in inflation. Low inflation and nominal interest rates would
in turn reduce central banks’ capacity to lower real
interest rates to restore full employment in an economic downturn.
A broad rollback of the improvements in financial
regulation and oversight achieved since the global
financial crisis. Such a rollback could lower capital
and liquidity buffers or weaken supervisory effectiveness, with negative repercussions for global financial
stability.
An inward shift in policies. A shift toward protectionism would reduce trade and cross-border investment
flows, harming global growth.
Noneconomic factors. These would include geopolitical tensions, domestic political discord, risks from
weak governance and corruption, extreme weather
events, and terrorism and security concerns, which
could derail growth.

These risks are closely interconnected and can be
mutually reinforcing. For example, an inward turn in
policies could be associated with increased geopolitical tensions as well as with rising global risk aversion;
noneconomic shocks can weigh directly on economic
activity while shaking confidence and market sentiment; and a faster-than-anticipated tightening of global

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

Executive Summary

financial conditions or a shift toward protectionism in
advanced economies could exacerbate capital outflow
pressures on emerging markets.
The welcome cyclical pickup in global economic
activity after disappointing growth over the past few
years provides an ideal window of opportunity to
undertake key reforms designed to boost potential
output and ensure that its benefits are broadly shared
and to build resilience against downside risks. With
countries still facing differences in cyclical conditions,
varied stances of monetary and fiscal policy remain
appropriate. Completing the economic recovery and
adopting strategies to ensure fiscal sustainability remain
important goals in many economies.
Important areas of strategic focus include:
• Raising potential output: Structural reforms and
growth-friendly fiscal policy are needed to boost
productivity and labor supply, with differing priorities across countries. Looking ahead, ongoing
structural transformation (labor-saving technological change and cross-border competition) demands
comprehensive policy approaches, including policies
that reduce the pain of adjustment and provide
opportunities for all.
• Securing the recovery and building resilience: In
advanced economies, monetary policy settings
should remain accommodative until there are firm
signs of inflation returning to targets. As documented in Chapter 2, still-subdued wage pressures
mostly reflect remaining slack, not fully captured
by headline unemployment rates. At the same time,
stretched asset valuations and increasing leverage in
some parts of the financial sector require close monitoring, with proactive micro- and macroprudential
supervision, as necessary. The stance of fiscal policy
should be aligned with structural reform efforts,
taking advantage of favorable cyclical conditions
to place public debt on a sustainable path while
supporting demand where still needed and feasible.
As Chapter 4 emphasizes, higher public spending
designed to boost potential output can result in
both domestic benefits as well as positive spillovers

to other countries, especially if it involves economies
with slack and monetary accommodation. Indeed,
adopting these policy recommendations would help
reduce external imbalances, notably for advanced
economies with excess surpluses, where stronger
domestic demand would offset negative demand
effects from the needed rebalancing by deficit
countries. In many emerging market and developing
economies, fiscal space to support demand is limited, especially in commodity exporters. But monetary policy can generally be supportive, as inflation
appears to have peaked in many countries. Exchange
rate flexibility helps with the adjustment to commodity price shocks. Efforts to improve governance
and the investment climate would also strengthen
growth prospects. In low-income countries, many of
which need to undertake durable fiscal adjustment
efforts and reduce financial vulnerabilities, growthenhancing reforms would help make the best use of
the coming demographic dividend by spurring job
creation.
• Strengthening international cooperation: For many of
the challenges that the global economy confronts,
individual country actions can be more effective if
supported by multilateral cooperation. Preserving
the global economic expansion will require policymakers to avoid protectionist measures and to do
more to ensure that gains from growth are shared
more widely. In addition to preserving an open trading system, key areas for collective action include:
safeguarding global financial stability; achieving
equitable tax systems and avoiding a race to the bottom; continuing to support low-income countries as
they pursue their development goals; and mitigating
and adapting to climate change. As Chapter 3 illustrates, many of the economies suffering the worst
consequences of higher temperatures and changed
weather patterns are those with the fewest resources
to deal with these challenges. Richer countries will
increasingly feel direct negative effects from unmitigated climate change, however, and will not be
immune to spillovers from the rest of the world.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

xvii

This page intentionally left blank

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER

1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

The pickup in growth projected in the April 2017 World
Economic Outlook (WEO) is strengthening. The global
growth forecast for 2017 and 2018—3.6 percent and
3.7 percent, respectively—is 0.1 percentage point higher
in both years than in the April and July forecasts. Notable
pickups in investment, trade, and industrial production,
coupled with strengthening business and consumer confidence, are supporting the recovery. With growth outcomes
in the first half of 2017 generally stronger than expected,
upward revisions to growth are broad based, including
for the euro area, Japan, China, emerging Europe, and
Russia. These more than offset downward revisions for
the United States, the United Kingdom, and India.
However, the recovery is not complete: although
the baseline outlook is better, growth remains weak in
many countries. The outlook for advanced economies
has improved, notably for the euro area, but in many
countries inflation remains weak, indicating that slack
has yet to be eliminated, and prospects for growth in
GDP per capita are held back by weak productivity
growth and rising old-age dependency ratios. Prospects
for many emerging market and developing economies in
sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East, and Latin America are lackluster, with several experiencing stagnant per
capita incomes. Fuel exporters are particularly hard hit by
the protracted adjustment to lower commodity revenues.
Risks to the baseline are broadly balanced in the short
term but skewed to the downside in the medium term.
Short-term growth could increase further, as stronger
confidence and favorable market conditions unleash
pent-up demand, but setbacks are also possible. With high
policy uncertainty, missteps—which the baseline assumes
will be avoided—or other shocks could materialize,
taking a toll on market confidence and asset valuations,
and tightening financial conditions. Over the medium
term, dealing with financial sector challenges will be
essential. Minimizing the risk of a sharp slowdown in
China will require the Chinese authorities to intensify
their efforts to rein in the credit expansion. Many other
economies need to guard against a buildup of financial
stability risks in a global environment of easy finance and
monitor the risks from volatility as advanced economies’
central banks gradually withdraw stimulus. A decom-

pression of risk premiums and higher long-term interest
rates would expose fragilities, including by worsening
public debt dynamics. Although progress has been made
in addressing European banking sector issues, remaining
problems need to be addressed forcefully to avoid weakening confidence and fears of adverse feedback loops
between low demand, prices, and balance sheets in parts
of the euro area. Persistently low inflation in advanced
economies, which could ensue if domestic demand were
to falter, also carries significant risks, as it could lead to
lower medium-term inflation expectations and interest
rates, reducing central banks’ capacity to cut real interest
rates in an economic downturn. Although the chances
of advanced economy policies turning inward appear to
have diminished in the near term, pressures for increased
protectionism have not disappeared and ought to be
resisted. A host of noneconomic risks, including intensified
conflict and geopolitical tensions, also remain salient.
The welcome cyclical upturn after disappointing
growth over the past few years provides an ideal window
of opportunity to undertake critical reforms, thereby
staving off downside risks and raising potential output
and standards of living more broadly. Structural reforms
and growth-friendly fiscal policy measures are needed to
boost productivity and labor supply, with varying priorities across countries. In advanced economies, monetary
policy should remain accommodative until there are
firm signs of inflation returning to targets. At the same
time, stretched asset valuations and increasing leverage in
some market segments bear close monitoring, including
through proactive micro- and macroprudential supervision, as necessary. Fiscal policy should be aligned with
structural reform efforts, taking advantage of favorable
cyclical conditions to place public debt on a sustainable path while supporting demand where still needed
and feasible. In many emerging market and developing
economies, fiscal space to support demand is limited,
especially in commodity exporters. But monetary policy
can generally be supportive because inflation appears to
have peaked in many countries. Exchange rate flexibility helps the adjustment to external shocks. Efforts to
improve governance and the investment climate would
also strengthen growth prospects. Growth-enhancing

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

1

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 1.1. Global Activity Indicators

reforms would help low-income countries—many of which
need to undertake durable fiscal adjustment efforts and
reduce financial vulnerabilities—make the best use of the
coming demographic dividend by spurring job creation.

Global activity strengthened in the ﬁrst half of 2017, reﬂecting ﬁrmer domestic
demand growth in advanced economies and China and improved performance in
other large emerging market economies. Global manufacturing purchasing
managers’ indices indicate strong momentum continued into the third quarter.
20 1. World Trade, Industrial Production, and Manufacturing PMI
(Three-month moving average; annualized percent change ,
unless noted otherwise)
15
Manufacturing PMI (deviations from 50; right scale)
10
Industrial production

Recent Developments and Prospects

6

World Economy Keeping Its Momentum

4

The pickup in global activity that started in 2016
gathered steam in the first half of 2017, reflecting
firmer domestic demand growth in advanced economies and China and improved performance in other
large emerging market economies. The continued
recovery in global investment spurred stronger manufacturing activity (Figures 1.1 and 1.2). World trade
growth moderated in the second quarter after expanding very briskly in the first. Global purchasing manager
indices and other high-frequency indicators for July
and August suggest that global growth momentum
continued into the third quarter of 2017.
Among advanced economies, domestic demand and
output grew faster in the first half of 2017 than in the
second half of 2016. In the United States, weakness
in consumption in the first quarter turned out to be
temporary, while business investment continued to
strengthen, partly reflecting a recovery in the energy
sector. In the euro area and Japan, stronger private
consumption, investment, and external demand
bolstered overall growth momentum in the first half
of the year. Growth in most of the other advanced
economies, with the notable exception of the United
Kingdom, picked up in the first half of 2017 from its
pace in the second half of 2016, with both domestic
and external demand contributing.
Among emerging market and developing economies,
higher domestic demand in China and continued
recovery in key emerging market economies supported
growth in the first half of 2017. In India, growth
momentum slowed, reflecting the lingering impact of
the authorities’ currency exchange initiative as well as
uncertainty related to the midyear introduction of the
country-wide Goods and Services Tax. Higher external
demand boosted growth in other emerging market
economies in East Asia. In Brazil, strong export performance and a diminished pace of contraction in domestic demand allowed the economy to return to positive
growth in the first quarter of 2017, after eight quarters
of decline. Mexico maintained growth momentum,
despite uncertainty related to the renegotiation of the
North American Free Trade Agreement and significant

5

2

0

0

–5
–10

–2

World trade volumes
2011

12

13

14

14 2. Manufacturing PMI
(Three-month moving
12
average; deviations
10
from 50)
Advanced economies 1
8
Emerging market
6
economies 2
4

15

–4
Aug.
17

16

3. Consumer Conﬁdence
(Index, 2010 = 100)

130

Advanced economies 1
Emerging market
economies 2
World

125
120
115
110
105

2
0

100
95

–2
–4

8

2012 13

14

15

16

Aug.
17

2012 13

14

15

16

90
Aug.
17

GDP Growth
(Annualized semiannual percent change)
April 2017 WEO
4 4. Advanced Economies

October 2017 WEO
5. Emerging Market and
Developing Economies

3

9
8
7
6

2

5
1
0
2011:
H1

4
13:
H1

15:
H1

17:
H1

18: 2011:
H2 H1

13:
H1

15:
H1

17:
H1

3
18:
H2

Sources: CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis; Haver Analytics;
Markit Economics; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: CC = consumer conﬁdence; PMI = purchasing managers’ index; WEO =
World Economic Outlook.
1Australia, Canada (PMI only), Czech Republic, Denmark, euro area, Hong Kong SAR
(CC only), Israel, Japan, Korea, New Zealand (PMI only), Norway (CC only),
Singapore (PMI only), Sweden (CC only), Switzerland, Taiwan Province of China,
United Kingdom, United States.
2Argentina (CC only), Brazil, China, Colombia (CC only), Hungary, India (PMI only),
Indonesia, Latvia (CC only), Malaysia (PMI only), Mexico (PMI only), Philippines (CC
only), Poland, Russia, South Africa, Thailand (CC only), Turkey, Ukraine (CC only).

2

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Figure 1.2. Global Fixed Investment and Trade

Figure 1.3. Commodity Prices

Investment began to pick up in the third quarter of 2016. Global trade accelerated
as well, before moderating more recently.

Commodity prices softened during the ﬁrst half of 2017.

(Deﬂated using US consumer price index; index, 2014 = 100)

1.2 1. Contribution of Gross Fixed Capital Formation to GDP Growth 1
(Percentage point contribution, year-over-year)
1.0
Structures
Other
Equipment
Unclassiﬁed
0.8
Residential
Total
0.6

180

0.4

120

0.2

80
2015:Q115:Q2 15:Q3 15:Q4 16:Q1 16:Q2 16:Q3 16:Q4 17:Q1 17:Q2

12 2. Real Merchandise Imports
(Seasonally adjusted quarter-over-quarter annualized
9
percent change)
United States
Euro area
6
Japan
3
0

China
Other countries2
World

–3
–6

140

100

0.0
–0.2

Average petroleum spot price
Food
Metals

160

2015:Q1 15:Q2 15:Q3 15:Q4 16:Q1 16:Q2 16:Q3 16:Q4 17:Q1 17:Q2

Source: IMF staff calculations.
for 2017:Q2 are based on preliminary estimates for Russia.
2Other countries include Brazil, Canada, India, Korea, Mexico, Russia, South Africa,
Taiwan, Turkey, and the United Kingdom.
1Data

tightening of monetary policy over the past two years.
Recovering domestic and external demand supported
rebounding growth in Russia and Turkey. Internal and
cross-border conflict in parts of the Middle East still
weighed on economic activity, while Venezuela faced
a political and humanitarian crisis amid a deepening recession.
Softer Commodity Prices
The IMF’s Primary Commodities Price Index
declined by 5 percent between February and August
2017—that is, between the reference periods for the
April 2017 WEO and the current report (Figure 1.3).
Some of the biggest price drops were among fuels:
•• Oil prices fell by 8.1 percent between February and August, even as the Organization of the
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and some
non-OPEC oil exporters announced in May that
they would extend oil production cuts through the

60
40
20
0

2011

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; and IMF staff estimates.

first quarter of 2018. The main drivers of lower
prices were higher-than-expected US shale production and stronger-than-expected production recoveries in Libya and Nigeria. In addition, exports
from OPEC countries remained at relatively high
levels, even with lower production. Following some
strengthening in recent weeks, oil prices stood at
about $50 a barrel as of late August, still lower
than in the spring.
•• The natural gas price index—an average for Europe,
Japan, and the United States—decreased by 9.6 percent from February to August 2017. The decline
was mostly tied to seasonal factors and robust supply
from the United States and Russia, and lower oil
prices, which some natural gas prices are indexed
to. The diplomatic rift between Qatar, the world’s
largest exporter of liquefied natural gas, and several
other countries in the region, including Saudi Arabia, has not affected liquefied natural gas markets, as
Qatar’s exports have continued.
•• The coal price index—an average of Australian and
South African prices—increased by 16.5 percent
between February and August 2017. Following
the end of the disruption to coal transportation in
Australia caused by Cyclone Debbie in late March,
coal prices declined until June. Strong demand from
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

3

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 1.4. Global Inﬂation

(Three-month moving average; annualized percent change, unless noted
otherwise)
Headline consumer price inﬂation has moderated since the spring, reﬂecting a
decline in oil prices. While unemployment rates have continued to decline, wage
growth remains subdued.
Consumer price inﬂation

Core consumer price inﬂation
2. Emerging Market and
Developing Economies

3 1. Advanced Economies
2

7
6

1

5

0

4

–1

3

–2

2013

14

15

16

1
20 3. Producer Price Inﬂation

15

World
EMDEs

10
5

14

15

16

AEs

3.4
1.3

2013

14

15

16

Jul.
17

United States
EA
4 5. Core Consumer Price Inﬂation
(Percent change from
3
a year ago)
2

AEs2
EMDEs (right scale)

3.2

1.0
3.0
Jan. Apr. Jul. Oct. Jan. Apr. Aug.
16 16 16 16 17 17 17
United Kingdom
Japan
6. Labor Income Shares
106
(Percent)
104
102

1

100

0

98

–1
Jan. Apr. Jul. Oct. Jan. Apr. Jul. 2007
16 16 16 16 17 17 17

09

11

13

15

5 7. Unemployment Rate and Wage Growth in AEs 3
(Percent)
Unemployment rate (right inverted scale)
4
Wage rate (two-quarter moving average;
percent change from a year ago)

3
2
1

2
Jul.
17

1.9 4. Consumer Price Inﬂation 3.8
Expectation for 2017
(Percent)
3.6
1.6

0
–5
–10

2013

Jul.
17

2005 06

07

08

09

10

11

12

13

14

15

96
17:
Q2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
16 Jun.
17

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; Organisation for Economic Co operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = Advanced economies (AUT, BEL, CAN, CHE, CZE, DEU, DNK, ESP, EST,
FIN, FRA, GBR, GRC, HKG, IRL, ISR, ITA, JPN, KOR, LTU, LUX, LVA, NLD, NOR, PRT,
SGP, SVK, SVN, SWE, TWN, USA); EA = euro area; EMDEs = emerging market and
developing economies (BGR, BRA, CHL, CHN, COL, HUN, IDN, IND, MEX, MYS, PER,
PHL, POL, ROU, RUS, THA, TUR, ZAF). Panel 6 is equalized to 100 in 2007 by
shifting the level. Country list uses International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) country codes.
1In panel 3, AEs excludes HKG, ISR, and TWN. EMDEs includes UKR; excludes IDN,
IND, PER, and PHL.
2In panel 4, AEs includes AUS; excludes LUX.
3In panel 7, blue line includes AUS and NZL; excludes BEL. Red line includes AUS
and MLT; excludes HKG, SGP, and TWN.

4

China helped prices recover. Starting July 1, China
imposed coal import restrictions on several ports to
limit the adverse impact of lower international prices
on production. Together with the cutback of coal
production in China and sporadic labor disputes in
coal mines in Australia, these restrictions have put
renewed upward pressure on prices.
Among nonfuel commodities, prices of metals were
up modestly but agricultural commodity prices declined:
•• Metal prices have increased modestly (0.8 percent)
from February to August, with considerable variation across commodities. By June, the metal price
index had reached its lowest point in eight months
as demand projections (especially from the United
States and China) were revised down. However,
prices rebounded since and remained on an upward
trajectory in August with the improvement in macroeconomic sentiment, especially in China. Copper
and aluminum prices increased by slightly more
than 9 percent between February and August 2017,
reflecting strong demand and tight supplies; iron ore
prices dropped by about 16 percent over the same
period mainly because of an increase in supply from
Australia, Brazil, and China.
•• The IMF’s agricultural price index declined by
5 percent between February and August 2017.
Cereal prices rallied in June amid concerns over
hot and dry weather in the Northern Hemisphere,
but then declined substantially in August as forecasts for grain stocks at the end of the 2017–18
season increased unexpectedly. Meat prices
increased on stronger-than-expected demand and
tighter supplies.
Muted Inflation Pressures
Headline consumer price inflation has softened
since the spring as the boost to prices from the oil
price recovery of 2016 has faded and the decline in
oil prices (between March and July) has started to
exert downward pressure (Figure 1.4). Expectations of
consumer price inflation for the year have therefore
diminished, especially in emerging market and developing economies.
Core inflation—inflation rates when fuel and food
prices are excluded—has been generally soft. In most
advanced economies, core inflation has failed to
decisively increase toward central bank targets, even as
domestic demand has gathered pace and unemployment rates have fallen compared with the previous

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

year. Core inflation in the euro area has been stuck
in low gear at about 1.2 percent since April (after
hovering at just below 1 percent for a couple of years),
while in Japan it remained slightly negative for six
months through July. In the United States—where
core inflation is higher—the annual change in the
core personal consumption expenditure deflator (the
Federal Reserve’s preferred measure) declined from
just below 2 percent in early 2017 to 1.4 percent in
August. This decline in part reflected one-off factors
(including a reduction in prices of cell phone plans
and prescription drug prices). Many other advanced
economies, including Australia, Canada, Denmark,
Korea, Norway, and especially Taiwan Province of
China, are also experiencing weak inflation pressure.
The United Kingdom, where the strong depreciation
of the pound since last summer has passed through
into higher consumer prices, is an exception to
this pattern.
Sluggishness in core inflation in advanced
economies—a surprise in view of stronger-than-​
expected activity—has coincided with slow transmission of declining unemployment rates into faster
wage growth. Real wages in most large advanced
economies have moved broadly with labor productivity in recent years, as indicated by flat labor income
shares (Figure 1.4, panel 6). As shown in Chapter 2,
muted growth in nominal wages in recent years partly
reflects sluggishness in labor productivity.1 However,
the analysis also reveals continued spare capacity in
labor markets as a key drag: wage growth has been
particularly soft where unemployment and the share of
workers involuntarily working part time remain high.
The corollary of this finding is that, once firms and
workers become more confident in the outlook, and
labor markets tighten, wages should accelerate. In the
short term, higher wages should feed into higher unit
labor costs (unless productivity picks up), and higher
1The part of the wage-inflation weakening attributable to lower
productivity growth would likely have little or no pass-through into
weaker price inflation, given that the changes would have no net effect
on conventionally measured unit labor costs. A broad slowdown in
total factor productivity and an interrelated decline in capital accumulation have been the drivers of the slowdown in labor productivity
(Adler and others 2017). Shifts in the composition of the labor force
since the global financial crisis may also have exerted downward
pressure on productivity and wages. These shifts include the expanded
shares of female and older workers, whose participation rates have
generally risen (Box 1.1). New entrants tend to be paid less than existing workers (Daly, Hobijn, and Pedtke 2017). A larger share of older
workers has also been linked to slower productivity growth (Feyrer
2007; Aiyar, Ebeke, and Shao 2016; Adler and others 2017).

Global Prospects and Policies

prices should, in turn, spur nominal wage growth in a
self-reinforcing dynamic.
In many emerging market and developing economies, the waning of pass-through effects from earlier
exchange rate depreciations and, in some cases, recent
appreciations against the US dollar, have helped
moderate core inflation rates. However, much of the
softening of core inflation in emerging market economies in recent months can be attributed to India and
Brazil, where a one-off drop in food price inflation in
June and high excess capacity in the economy after two
years of recession, respectively, have also contributed
to weaker inflation. In China, core inflation remained
broadly stable at about 2 percent in July. In contrast, some other countries in the Commonwealth of
Independent States and the Middle East, North Africa,
Afghanistan, and Pakistan region are experiencing
continued inflationary pressures in 2017 as a result of
exchange rate depreciations, the removal of subsidies,
or increases in excise or value-added taxes.
Supportive Financial Conditions
Market sentiment has remained strong and volatility low since the publication of the most recent
(April 2017) WEO, even as expectations of US fiscal
easing have dimmed. On the monetary policy front,
the US Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates
in June to 1–1.25 percent, as expected. Following
the Federal Open Market Committee announcement
of September 20, markets priced in a 70 percent
probability of one additional rate increase by the
end of 2017. In most other advanced economies, the
monetary policy stance remained broadly unchanged,
except for Canada, which raised its policy rate by ¼ of
a percentage point in July and September.
With markets pricing in a slightly more gradual normalization of US monetary policy than anticipated in
the spring, given diminished expectations about fiscal
stimulus, nominal yields on 10-year US Treasury bonds
as of mid-September have declined by about 20 basis
points from their March 2017 average (Figure 1.5).
Long-term sovereign bond yields have remained
broadly stable in Japan and Germany, risen by some
10 basis points in the United Kingdom, and declined
by 20–30 basis points in France, Italy, and Spain, as
spreads relative to German bund yields compressed
sharply, particularly in the aftermath of the French
presidential election. Equity markets in advanced economies have continued to rise in recent months amid
strong earnings, further improvements in consumer
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

5

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 1.5. Advanced Economies: Monetary and Financial
Market Conditions
(Percent, unless noted otherwise)

Market sentiment has been strong in advanced economies. Compared with the
spring, a more gradual normalization of US monetary policy is anticipated and
credit spreads remain compressed.
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5

2. Policy Rate Expectations 1
(Percent; dashed lines
are from the April
2017 WEO)
United States
Euro area
United Kingdom

1. US Policy Rate
Expectations1
Sep. 16, 2015
Sep. 16, 2016
Nov. 8, 2016
Apr. 3, 2017
Sep. 15, 2017

4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.5
Sep.
20

1.0
0.5
0.0

6
5

2015 16

17

18

19

Sep.
20

4
United States

2

–1

19

1,200
1,000
800
600
400

Germany

1
0

18

4. Credit Spreads3
(Basis points)
US high grade
US high yield
Euro high grade
Euro high
yield

3. Key Interest Rates 2
US average 30-year
ﬁxed-rate mortgage

3

2017

Japan
2013

200
14

15

16

Sep.
17

200 5. Equity Markets
(Index, 2007 = 100)
180
160
S&P 500
140
120
100
80
60
MSCI Emerging Market
40
Euro Stoxx
20
TOPIX
0
2013 14
15
16
Aug.
17

2013

14

15

0
Sep.
17

16

6. Price-to-Earnings Ratios3
United States
Japan
Germany
Italy

35
30
25
20
15

2013

14

15

16

10
Sep.
17

Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; Thomson Reuters Datastream; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: MSCI = Morgan Stanley Capital International; S&P = Standard & Poor’s;
TOPIX = Tokyo Stock Price Index; WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1Expectations are based on the federal funds rate futures for the United States, the
sterling overnight interbank average rate for the United Kingdom, and the euro
interbank offered forward rate for the euro area; updated September 15, 2017.
2Interest rates are 10-year government bond yields, unless noted otherwise. Data
are through September 15, 2017.
3Data are through September 15, 2017.

6

and business confidence, and favorable macroeconomic
data. Market volatility indicators remain low.
With narrowing interest differentials, the US dollar
weakened in real effective terms by over 7 percent from
March to mid-September 2017 (Figure 1.6, panel 1),
more than reversing its gains after the US election,
whereas the euro and the Canadian dollar appreciated
by 6 percent on stronger growth prospects and higher
policy rates in Canada. Among other currencies, the
yen depreciated by about 3 percent and the Swiss franc
and Korean won by 4 percent.
In emerging market economies, financial conditions
since March generally have been supportive of a pickup
in economic activity. Equity markets have strengthened
(Figure 1.7); long-term interest rates on local-currency
bonds have generally declined (Figure 1.8), China being
the exception; and spreads on the Global Emerging
Markets Bond Index have fallen slightly. As search
for yield continues (Chapter 1 of the October Global
Financial Stability Report [GFSR]), emerging market
currencies have generally strengthened relative to the US
dollar. As of August 2017, changes since March in real
effective terms have generally been moderate (Figure 1.6,
panel 2). The Mexican peso appreciated by 10 percent
on tighter monetary policy and declining concerns about
trade-related frictions with the United States, while the
South African rand depreciated by 7 percent on domestic political uncertainty, the Brazilian real depreciated by
over 4 percent on monetary policy easing and concerns
about the reform agenda, and the Russian ruble depreciated by a similar amount on weakening oil prices.
Capital flows to emerging market economies have
remained resilient in recent months, continuing their
recovery after a sharp decline in late 2015 and early
2016. As discussed in Box 1.2, this pattern reflects a
pickup in capital flows to China and a strong global
recovery in nonresident portfolio inflows in the first
half of 2017 (Figure 1.9, panel 1) as investor optimism
about the global economic outlook improved and
financial conditions eased.

Key Forces Shaping the Outlook
Continued Cyclical Recovery in Advanced Economies
(and Revisions to Potential Output)
In advanced economies, the ongoing cyclical
recovery is stronger than previously projected. Indeed,
positive surprises in growth in the first half of 2017
typically occurred in countries where estimates for
output were below potential in 2016 (Figure 1.10,

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Figure 1.6. Real Effective Exchange Rate Changes,
November 2016–September 2017
(Percent)

In real effective terms, the US dollar weakened by about 7 percent and the euro
strengthened by 6 percent from March to August 2017. Changes in most emerging
market currencies have been moderate.
Latest relative to August 2017
August 2017 relative to March 2017
March 2017 relative to November 8, 2016
8 1. Advanced Economies 1
6

Figure 1.7. Emerging Market Economies: Equity Markets and
Credit
Equity indices in emerging market economies have risen since the spring and
credit growth remains supportive of a pickup in activity.
200 1. Equity Markets
(Index, 2007 = 100)
180

Emerging Asia
excluding China

160
140
120
100
60

2

Emerging Europe

40

0

2012

–2

13

–4

China
14

15

16

Aug.
17

Real Credit Growth1
(Year-over-year percent change)

–6
–8
USA EA

JPN GBR SWE CHE KOR TWN SGP CAN NOR AUS NZL

16 2. Emerging Market Economies1
12

25

2.

BRA
IND

20

3.

CHN
MEX

COL
MYS
TUR

15

IDN
RUS

10

40
30
20

5

8

10

0

4

–5

0

–10

–4

–15

0
2012 13

14

15

16

–8
–12

Latin America

80

4

–10

Global Prospects and Policies

panel 1). With growth generally above potential output, economic slack is gradually being reduced.
Positive revisions to growth have also come with some
upward revisions to the estimated path of potential output. Indeed, despite an upward revision to the cumulative growth rate over 2016–18 relative to the October
2016 WEO forecast of about 0.7 percentage point, the
forecast of the output gap for 2018 has been revised in
absolute terms by only half as much. As Figure 1.10,
panel 2 shows, the upward revision to growth exceeds
the decline in the output gap for most individual
countries. The difference is explained by slightly higher
projected potential growth during this period (about

2012 13

14

15

16

–10
Jun
17

Credit-to-GDP Ratio1
(Percent)

ZAF CHN IND IDN MYS PHL THA HUN POL RUS TUR BRA CHL COL MEX PER

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: EA = euro area. Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) country codes.
1Latest data available are for September 15, 2017.

Jul.
17

230 5.

85 4.
75
65

BRA
IDN
RUS

210

COL
IND
TUR

190

55

170

45

150

35

130

25

110

15
2006 08

10

12

14

17:
Q2

30
MEX (right scale)
CHN
MYS

90
2006 08

25
20
15
10
5

10

12

14

0
17:
Q2

Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; Haver Analytics; IMF, International Financial Statistics
(IFS) database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) country codes.
1
Credit is other depository corporations’ claims on the private sector (from IFS),
except in the case of Brazil, for which private sector credit is from the Monetary
Policy and Financial System Credit Operations published by Banco Central do
Brasil, and China, for which credit is total social ﬁnancing after adjusting for local
government debt swaps.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

7

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 1.8. Emerging Market Economies: Interest Rates

Figure 1.9. Emerging Market Economies: Capital Flows

Long maturity yields on local currency debt have generally declined.

Capital ﬂows to emerging market economies continued to recover.

Emerging Europe
Emerging Asia excluding China
13 1. Policy Rate
(Percent)
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
2012

13

14

2. Real Policy Rates1
(Percent)

10
8

China
Latin America

15

16

40 1. Net Flows in Emerging Market Funds
Bond
(Billions of US dollars)
Equity
30
Taper
EM-VXY
20
tantrum
10
0
–10
1st ECB
China
–20
Greek Irish
LTROs
equity market
crisis
crisis
–30
sell-off
–40
2010
11
12
13
14
15
Aug.
17

4

0
–6

0
BRA CHL CHN COL IDN IND MEX MYS PER PHL POL RUS THA TUR ZAF
3. Ten-Year Government Bond Yields2
(Percent)

12

15

16 17:
Q1

15

16 17:
Q1

15

16 17:
Q1

3

2

14

Aug.
17

6

China
Saudi Arabia

–3

–2

16

Emerging Europe
Emerging Asia excluding China
Latin America

9

August 2016
August 2016 average
August 2017
August 2017 average

6

15 2. Capital Inﬂows
(Percent of GDP)
12

US presidential
election

10

2007

08

09

10

11

12

Total
13

14

15 3. Capital Outﬂows Excluding Change in Reserves
(Percent of GDP)
12
Emerging Europe
9
Emerging Asia excluding China
Latin America
6
3

8

0

6

–3
–6

4
2

2013

600
500

14

15

16

Sep.
17

4. EMBI Sovereign Spreads2
(Basis points)

2007

08

09

10

15 4. Change in Reserves
(Percent of GDP)
12

11

12

Total
13

14

Emerging Europe
Emerging Asia excluding China
Latin America

9
6

400

3

300

0

200

–3

100

–6

0

China
Saudi Arabia

2013

14

15

16

Sep.
17

Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; Haver Analytics; IMF, International Financial Statistics;
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Emerging Asia excluding China comprises India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines, and Thailand; emerging Europe comprises Poland, Romania, Russia,
and Turkey; Latin America comprises Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru.
EMBI = J.P. Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index. Data labels in the ﬁgure use
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
1
Deﬂated by two-year-ahead World Economic Outlook inﬂation projections.
2
Data are through September 15, 2017.

8

China
Saudi Arabia
2007

08

09

10

11

12

Total
13

14

Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; EPFR Global; Haver Analytics; IMF, International Financial
Statistics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Capital inﬂows are net purchases of domestic assets by nonresidents. Capital
outﬂows are net purchases of foreign assets by domestic residents. Emerging Asia
excluding China comprises India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, and
Thailand; emerging Europe comprises Poland, Romania, Russia, and Turkey; Latin
America comprises Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru. ECB = European
Central Bank; EM-VXY = J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Volatility Index; LTROs =
longer-term reﬁnancing operations.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

In the medium term, growth is expected to soften
once gaps close (mostly expected in 2018–19) and output returns to growing at the same rate as its potential.
Potential growth will be increasingly held back by slower
growth in workforces as populations age and an increasing share of people enter retirement. The speed at which
the aging process weighs on the labor force depends
crucially on the labor force participation rates of various
demographic groups. For the aggregate of advanced
economies, labor force participation declined by 0.8 percentage point between 2007 and 2016 for the adult population, with a striking decline of 2.3 percentage points
for men in contrast to a 0.7 percentage point increase for
women (Box 1.1). Labor force participation rate changes
differ notably across advanced economies, despite the
overall similarity of demographic trends. For instance,
the widely documented decline in the labor force participation rate in the United States contrasts with rising
participation rates in many European countries, including Germany, Italy, and the United Kingdom. Policy
efforts that encourage further participation by women
and reverse declines for men could postpone or soften
the demographic shift’s drag on potential output.
Potential growth projections are also held back by the
assumption that total factor productivity growth will
recover only modestly from its low rate of the past few
years and hence will stay well below the pace registered
before the global financial crisis. Adler and others (2017)
discuss in more detail the factors that can explain the
decline in productivity growth over the past decade.
Emerging Market Economies and
Convergence Prospects
The growth rate for emerging market and developing economies is forecast to rise to 4.6 percent in
2017, 4.9 percent in 2018, and about 5 percent over
the medium term. In per capita terms, growth rates
are about 1.3 percentage points lower, but substan-

(Percent)

The ongoing cyclical recovery is stronger than previously projected, with positive
growth surprises in the ﬁrst half of 2017 typically occurring in countries with
output below estimated potential in 2016.
2.0 1. 2016 Output Gaps and 2017 Growth Surprises
LVA
1.6
EST SWE
AUT
1.2
HKG
CAN
SVN
DNK CZE
ISL
0.8
NLD NZL
PRT FIN
CYP
USA
0.4
EA
JPN
DEU
KOR LTU
MLT
ITA
0.0
GBR
CHE
ESP
LUX
TWN
–0.4
AUS NOR
ISR
FRA
GRC
SGP SVK
IRL
–0.8
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
2016 output gap (percent)

2017 growth surprise

Medium-Term Growth in Advanced Economies—
Structural Headwinds

Figure 1.10. Revisions to 2017 Growth and 2016 Output Gaps

2. Revisions to 2018 Output Gap and 2015 –18 Growth Forecasts
(Percentage points)
45-degree
3
HKG
line
DEN
GBR AEs
CAN
PRT
DEU
BEL
2
SGP EA
NLD FIN
KOR USA
ESP NZL
1 GRC
AUT
CHE
0
AUS
CZE
FRA ITA
ISR JPN
TWN
–1
NOR
IRL
SWE
–2
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
Change in cumulative growth, 2015 –18
4

Change in 2018 output gap

0.1 percentage point a year), driven by higher projected
investment, which boosts productive capacity.
With output in 2017 remaining slightly below
potential for the advanced economies group, the cyclical recovery still has some room to run. This assessment is consistent with still elevated unemployment
rates in a few countries and relatively high shares of
workers who would prefer to work full time but can
only obtain part-time work (Chapter 2).

Global Prospects and Policies

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: In panel 1, 2017 growth surprises are differences between current growth
estimates for H1:2017 and projections in the October 2016 World Economic
Outlook (WEO). In panel 2, revisions to output gap and growth forecasts are relative
to the October 2016 WEO. Japan’s latest ﬁgures reﬂect comprehensive
methodological revisions adopted in December 2016. Data labels in the ﬁgure use
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. AEs = advanced
economies; EA = euro area.

tially above the per capita growth rate for advanced
economies (1.4 percent, on average, during 2017–22),
implying a gradual convergence in GDP per capita
between the two country groups. For emerging market
and developing economies, this pace of growth and
convergence is slower than during the past decade, but
faster than during 1995–2005.
Underlying these aggregate figures is substantial
heterogeneity in economic performance across emerging
market and developing economies—a theme explored in
more detail in Box 1.3. The projected aggregate growth
rate over 2017–22 is sustained by fast growth in the two
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

9

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

largest countries, China and India, which account for
more than 40 percent of GDP (whether measured at
purchasing power parity or market rates) and more than
40 percent of the population of emerging market and
developing economies.2 Indeed, the forecast for growth
in GDP per capita falls below the group’s aggregate figure of 3.5 percent for about ¾ of emerging market and
developing economies. And for 43 economies (28 percent of the total), per capita growth rates are projected
to be lower than for advanced economies, implying a
decline in relative living standards rather than convergence. Box 1.3 also shows that very small economies
(with populations of less than 500,000 people) and fuel
exporters are overrepresented among the economies with
weak projected growth.
The challenges faced by very small economies,
related to such factors as diseconomies of scale, lack of
diversification, and the frequency of natural disasters,
are well documented.3 As also highlighted in previous
WEOs, many commodity exporters—especially fuel
exporters—are still struggling to adjust to sharply
lower commodity prices relative to those prevailing earlier in the decade.

discussed in the April 2017 Fiscal Monitor. So far,
exchange rate flexibility has helped the adjustment—
countries that allowed greater exchange rate flexibility
have drawn less on their buffers (Box 1.4).
Looking ahead, growth in commodity exporters is
forecast to recover further, contributing significantly to
the projected pickup in global growth between 2016
and 2022 (the last year of the WEO forecast horizon) (Figure 1.12, panels 2–3). Nevertheless, growth
in commodity exporters is projected to remain well
below its historical average and will account for only
a modest share of total growth for emerging market
and developing economies as a group (Figure 1.12,
panel 1). In contrast, growth is projected to remain
high for the group of commodity-importing countries,
which account for the lion’s share of global growth,
with higher growth in India and other commodity
importers more than offsetting a slowdown in China.
A similar pattern is at play for low-income developing
countries, where growth in commodity importers is
forecast to exceed that in commodity exporters (Figure 1.12, panel 4).

Adjustment to Terms-of-Trade Changes in Emerging
Market and Developing Economies

The Forecast

A modest cyclical recovery is at work in several emerging market and developing economies
that underperformed in recent years because of
terms-of-trade losses and idiosyncratic factors. The
strength of the Chinese economy, as well as the
broader cyclical rebound in manufacturing and trade,
are providing some support to this recovery.
Commodity prices have declined modestly relative
to the spring, but remain generally higher than their
2016 averages. Movements in commodity terms of
trade imply relatively small projected gains and losses
in disposable income when compared with the very
large losses for commodity exporters during 2015–16
(Figure 1.11). Many countries heavily dependent on
commodity revenues still have much of the needed
fiscal and external adjustment ahead of them, as also

Policy and Other Assumptions

2At market rates, GDP in China in 2016 exceeded the combined
GDP of the next largest 12 emerging market and developing economies ranked by size (India, Brazil, Russia, Mexico, Indonesia, Turkey,
Saudi Arabia, Argentina, Poland, Islamic Republic of Iran, Thailand,
Nigeria).
3For instance, see IMF (2016b). Chapter 3 explores the
macroeconomic implications of changes in weather patterns for
low-income countries.

10

Fiscal policy at the global level is projected to
remain broadly neutral in 2017 and 2018. The
overall neutral stance masks some variation across
countries and important changes relative to the April
2017 WEO assumptions. Among advanced economies, the fiscal stance (measured by the fiscal impulse)
in 2017 is forecast to be broadly neutral, reflecting
projected easing in Canada, Germany, Italy, and Korea;
broadly neutral policy in Japan and the United States;
and tightening in Spain (Figure 1.13, panels 1 and 2).4
For 2018, the forecast assumes moderate fiscal
policy tightening in advanced economies, reflecting
projected tightening in Japan, the United Kingdom,
and to a lesser extent, the United States. The projected
increase in the structural fiscal balance for the United
States in 2018 in the current forecast is similar to the
projection in the October 2016 WEO, but represents
major tightening relative to the April 2017 assumptions (which included a fiscal impulse of 1½ percent
of GDP between 2017 and 2019 on the basis of
4The fiscal impulse is defined as the change in the structural fiscal
balance as a share of potential output.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Figure 1.11. Emerging Markets: Terms-of-Trade Windfall
Gains and Losses

Figure 1.12. GDP Growth, 1999–2022

Commodity terms-of-trade shifts imply relatively small projected gains and losses
in disposable income when compared with the very large losses for commodity
exporters during 2015–16.

While commodity exporters are projected to grow at rates well below their
historical averages, they are nevertheless expected to contribute signiﬁcantly to
the projected global growth pickup between 2016 and 2022.

10

(Percent)

20 1. Growth in Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Commodity exporters
Noncommodity exporters in EMDEs excluding China
16
China
12

1. Terms-of-Trade Windfall Losses1
(Percent of GDP)

0
–10
2015
2016
2017–18 (Apr. 2017 WEO commodity prices)
2017–18 (Oct. 2017 WEO commodity prices)

–20
–30
–40

8

SAU

KAZ

DZA

NGA

IRN

RUS

COL

MYS

AUS

CAN

MEX

BRA

ARG

8
4
0
–4
1999 2001

07

09

Advanced economies
India
China

2015
2016
2017–18 (Apr. 2017 WEO commodity prices)
2017–18 (Oct. 2017 WEO commodity prices)

4

05

11

13

15

17

19

22

IDN

2. Terms-of-Trade
Terms
Windfall Gains1
(Percent of GDP)

6

03

5 2. Contributions to World GDP
Growth
(PPP weights)
4

Noncommodity exporters excluding China,
India, and Brazil
Commodity exporters
3. Contributions to World GDP
Growth
(Market weights)

5
4

2

3

3

0

2

2

1

1

–2

USA

EGY

FRA

TUR

DEU

POL

ITA

ESP

JPN

CHN

IND

THA

PAK

KOR

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) country codes. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1
Gains (losses) for 2017–18 are simple averages of annual incremental gains
(losses) for 2017 and 2018. The windfall is an estimate of the change in
disposable income arising from commodity price changes. The windfall gain in
year t for a country exporting x US dollars of commodity A and importing m US
dollars of commodity B in year t – 1 is deﬁned as (ΔptAxt – 1 – ΔptBmt – 1) / Yt – 1, in
which ΔptA and ΔptB are the percentage changes in the prices of A and B between
year t – 1 and year t, and Y is GDP in year t – 1 in US dollars. See also Gruss (2014).

then-anticipated corporate and personal income tax
reductions). In emerging market and developing economies, fiscal policy is expected to be broadly neutral in
both 2017 and 2018. (The projected looser fiscal policy for the group in 2018 relative to the assumptions
in April primarily reflects downward revisions for the
structural fiscal balances of Brazil and China).
On monetary policy, the forecast assumes a somewhat more gradual normalization of the policy interest
rate in the United States than projected in the April
2017 WEO. With US fiscal policy now set to be

0

2016

2022

2016

0

2022

18 4. Growth in Low-Income Developing Countries
Nigeria
16
Others
14
Commodity exporters excluding Nigeria and Yemen
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
1999 2001 03
05
07
09
11
13
15
17
19

22

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Commodity exporters includes fuel and nonfuel primary products exporters,
as indicated in Table D of the Statistical Appendix, plus Brazil and Peru. EMDEs =
emerging market and developing economies; PPP = purchasing power parity.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

11

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 1.13. Fiscal Indicators

(Percent of GDP, unless noted otherwise)
The projected overall neutral ﬁscal policy stance for 2017 and 2018 masks
variation across countries.
2 1. Change in the Structural Fiscal Balance
(Percentage points)
2013
2014
2016
2017
1
April 2017 WEO

2015
2018

0
–1
–2

Advanced
economies

Emerging market and
developing economies

3 2. Change in the Structural Fiscal Balance
(Percentage points)
2013
2014
2
2016
2017
April 2017 WEO

2015
2018

1
0
–1

United States

Japan1

France, Germany, Greece, Ireland,
United Kingdom Italy, Portugal, Spain

2 3. Fiscal Balance
0
–2
–4
–6
–8

World
Advanced economies

–10
2001

04

07

Emerging market and
developing economies
10

13

16

19

180 4. Gross Public Debt
World
Advanced economies 2
160
Major advanced
Emerging and
Latin America
140
economies2,3
developing Asia
and the
120
Caribbean
Other emerging market and
100
developing economies
80
60
40
20
1950
60
70
80
90
2000
10
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1Japan's latest ﬁgures reﬂect comprehensive methodological revisions adopted in
December 2016.
2Data through 2000 exclude the United States.
3Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States.

12

22

22

broadly neutral in 2017 and projected to tighten in
2018, monetary policy is projected to be moderately
more accommodative than previously expected, given
weaker projected demand and diminished inflation
pressure. The US policy interest rate is projected to
remain broadly unchanged at 100–125 basis points
for the rest of 2017 and rise by about 75 basis points
in 2018, reaching a long-term equilibrium rate of
slightly less than 3 percent in 2020. In the euro
area and Japan, the forecast assumes that monetary
policy will remain very accommodative. Short-term
rates are projected to remain negative in the euro
area through 2018 and close to zero in Japan over
the forecast horizon. The assumed monetary policy stances across emerging market economies vary,
reflecting these economies’ diverse cyclical positions.
Given faster-than-expected declines in inflation rates
in many larger economies, such as Brazil, India, and
Russia, the projected level of monetary policy interest rates for the group is somewhat lower than in the
April 2017 WEO.
Global financial conditions are assumed to remain
accommodative, in line with the April projections. As
discussed in Chapter 1 of the October 2017 GFSR,
an easing of lending conditions in major economies
is expected to offset the anticipated gradual rise in
long-term interest rates, while the normalization of
monetary policy in the United States and the United
Kingdom is expected to proceed smoothly, without
triggering large and protracted increases in financial
market volatility. Except for several vulnerable economies, most emerging markets are expected to face
generally accommodative financial conditions, with
higher policy rates partially offset by a recovery in risk
appetite, as reflected in generally contained sovereign
bond spreads and the uptick in most equity markets.
Despite the recent decline in commodity prices, the
IMF’s commodity price index is expected to increase
by 12.3 percent in 2017 from its average in 2016, and
then fall slightly again in 2018, by 0.1 percent. After
averaging $43 a barrel in 2016, oil prices are expected
to average $50.3 a barrel in 2017 (down from $55.2 a
barrel in the April 2017 WEO), and stay at about that
level in 2018. Nonfuel commodity prices are expected
to strengthen in 2017–18 from their 2016 averages
because of stronger demand for metals from China,
tight supply conditions for food, and a general pickup
in global demand.
Looking further ahead, futures markets point
toward a slight rise in commodity prices by 2022.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

While energy prices are expected to increase modestly
because of growing demand in emerging markets, food
prices are expected to fall moderately as some supply
disruptions wane.
Finally, against a backdrop of elevated policy uncertainty, the forecast rests on the assumption that major
policy missteps are avoided. For instance, negotiations
on the future economic relations between the United
Kingdom and the European Union (EU) are assumed
to proceed without raising excessive uncertainty, and
the arrangements are expected to eventually settle in
a manner that avoids a very large increase in economic barriers.

Global Outlook for 2017–18
World growth is projected to increase from 3.2 percent in 2016 to 3.6 percent in 2017 and 3.7 percent
in 2018—an upward revision of 0.1 percentage point
for both 2017 and 2018 relative to April. Economic
activity is projected to pick up speed in all country
groups except for the Middle East, and forecasts of
the strength of the outlook by region have changed
only modestly (Table 1.1).
In line with a stronger-than-expected rise in growth
in advanced economies so far in 2017 (especially in the
euro area), their projected growth rate has been revised
upward to 2.2 percent for 2017 (from 2 percent projected in April)—a notable increase from 1.7 percent
in 2016. The advanced economy forecast for 2018 is
unchanged, with lower projected US growth (under
the assumption that fiscal policy will not provide
the previously envisaged boost to demand) offsetting
higher projected growth in the euro area.
Growth is forecast to increase strongly in emerging
market and developing economies, from an upwardly
revised 4.3 percent in 2016 to 4.6 percent in 2017 and
4.9 percent in 2018, a 0.1 percentage point increase
for 2017 and 2018 relative to the April forecast. The
upward revisions to the growth forecast primarily
reflect stronger projected activity in China and in
emerging Europe for 2017 and 2018.
As discussed earlier, although commodity importers
account for the lion’s share of growth in emerging market and developing economies, the projected increase
in growth from 2016 is driven primarily by stronger
projected growth for commodity exporters, most
notably Brazil and Russia, that experienced severe macroeconomic strains during 2015–16. As emphasized
in previous WEO reports and in Box 1.3, prospects

Global Prospects and Policies

across emerging market and developing economies
remain heterogeneous, with emerging Asian countries
generally growing at a fast pace, but many countries
in Latin America, sub-Saharan Africa, and the Middle
East struggling with subpar performance.

Growth Outlook for the Medium Term
Global growth is forecast to increase marginally
beyond 2018, reaching 3.8 percent by 2021. With
growth in advanced economies projected to gradually
decline toward potential growth rates of about 1.7 percent once economic slack is eliminated, this further
pickup in global activity is entirely driven by emerging
market and developing economies. In these countries,
growth is projected to increase to 5 percent by the
end of the forecast period, with their impact on global
activity boosted by their rising world economic weight.
This forecast assumes some strengthening of growth
in commodity exporters, though to rates much more
modest than in 2000–15; a gradual increase in India’s
growth rate resulting from implementation of important structural reforms; continued strong growth in
other commodity importers; and a lower but still high
trend growth rate in China (Figure 1.12, panels 1–3).

Growth Outlook for Individual Countries and Regions
Advanced Economies
•• The US economy is projected to expand at 2.2 percent in 2017 and 2.3 percent in 2018. The projection of a continuation of near-term growth that is
moderately above potential reflects very supportive
financial conditions and strong business and consumer confidence. The downward revision relative
to the April WEO forecasts (of 2.3 and 2.5 percent
for 2017 and 2018, respectively) reflects a major
correction in US fiscal policy assumptions. Given
the significant policy uncertainty, IMF staff ’s macroeconomic forecast now uses a baseline assumption of
unchanged policies, whereas the April 2017 WEO
built in a fiscal stimulus from anticipated tax cuts.
Over a longer horizon, US growth is expected to
moderate. Potential growth is estimated at 1.8 percent, reflecting the assumption of continued sluggish
growth in total factor productivity and diminished
growth of the workforce due to population aging.
•• The euro area recovery is expected to gather strength
this year, with growth projected to rise to 2.1 percent in 2017, before moderating to 1.9 percent in
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

13

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections
(Percent change, unless noted otherwise)

World Output
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan2
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Commonwealth of Independent States
Russia
Excluding Russia
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India4
ASEAN-55
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Saudi Arabia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Nigeria
South Africa
Memorandum
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
World Trade Volume (goods and services)
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Commodity Prices (US dollars)
Oil6
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity export
weights)
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies7

2016
3.2
1.7
1.5
1.8
1.9
1.2
0.9
3.2
1.0
1.8
1.5
2.2

Projections
2017
2018
3.6
3.7
2.2
2.0
2.2
2.3
2.1
1.9
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.8
1.5
1.1
3.1
2.5
1.5
0.7
1.7
1.5
3.0
2.1
2.6
2.5

Difference from July
2017 WEO Update1
2017
2018
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.5
0.2
0.3
0.1

Difference from April
2017 WEO1
2017
2018
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
0.4
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.7
0.3
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.1
–0.3
0.0
1.1
0.1
0.3
0.1

4.3
0.4
–0.2
1.9
6.4
6.7
7.1
4.9
3.1
–0.9
–3.6
2.3
5.0
1.7
1.4
–1.6
0.3

4.6
2.1
1.8
2.9
6.5
6.8
6.7
5.2
4.5
1.2
0.7
2.1
2.6
0.1
2.6
0.8
0.7

4.9
2.1
1.6
3.3
6.5
6.5
7.4
5.2
3.5
1.9
1.5
1.9
3.5
1.1
3.4
1.9
1.1

0.0
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.0
0.1
–0.5
0.1
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.3

0.1
0.0
0.2
–0.2
0.0
0.1
–0.3
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.2
–0.1
0.2
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1

0.1
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.1
0.2
–0.5
0.2
1.5
0.1
0.5
0.4
0.0
–0.3
0.0
0.0
–0.1

0.1
0.0
0.2
–0.2
0.1
0.3
–0.3
0.0
0.2
–0.1
–0.2
–0.1
0.1
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
–0.5

2.0
3.6
5.1
2.5

2.3
4.6
2.2
3.0

2.1
5.2
3.2
3.1

0.2
0.0
0.0
0.1

0.2
0.0
0.2
0.1

0.3
–0.1
–0.1
0.1

0.3
–0.1
0.0
0.1

2.4

4.2

4.0

0.2

0.1

0.4

0.1

2.7
2.0

4.0
4.4

3.8
4.9

0.0
0.1

0.2
0.2

0.0
–0.1

–0.2
0.6

2.2
2.5

3.8
4.8

3.6
4.5

–0.1
1.0

0.2
0.0

0.3
1.2

0.4
0.2

–15.7

17.4

–0.2

–3.8

–0.3

–11.5

0.1

–1.8

7.1

0.5

1.7

1.9

–1.4

1.8

0.8
4.3

1.7
4.2

1.7
4.4

–0.2
–0.3

–0.1
–0.2

–0.3
–0.5

–0.2
0.0

London Interbank Offered Rate (percent)
On US Dollar Deposits (six month)
1.1
1.4
1.9
–0.2
–0.3
–0.3
–0.9
On Euro Deposits (three month)
–0.3
–0.3
–0.3
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
On Japanese Yen Deposits (six month)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
Note: Real effective exchange rates are assumed to remain constant at the levels prevailing during July 20–August 17, 2017. Economies are listed on the basis of
economic size. The aggregated quarterly data are seasonally adjusted.
¹Difference based on rounded figures for the current, July 2017 World Economic Outlook Update, and April 2017 World Economic Outlook forecasts.
2Japan’s historical national accounts figures reflect a comprehensive revision by the national authorities, released in December 2016. The main revisions are the
switch from the System of National Accounts 1993 to the System of National Accounts 2008 and the updating of the benchmark year from 2005 to 2011.
3Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
4For India, data and forecasts are presented on a fiscal year basis and GDP from 2011 onward is based on GDP at market prices with fiscal year 2011/12 as a
base year.

14

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Table 1.1 (continued)
Q4-over-Q48

Year-over-Year

World Output
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan2
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Commonwealth of Independent States
Russia
Excluding Russia
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India4
ASEAN-55
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Saudi Arabia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Nigeria
South Africa
Memorandum
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
World Trade Volume (goods and services)
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Commodity Prices (US dollars)
Oil6
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity export
weights)
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies7

Projections
2017
2018
3.6
3.7
2.2
2.0
2.2
2.3
2.1
1.9
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.8
1.5
1.1
3.1
2.5
1.5
0.7
1.7
1.5
3.0
2.1
2.6
2.5

2015
3.4
2.2
2.9
2.0
1.5
1.1
0.8
3.2
1.1
2.2
0.9
2.1

2016
3.2
1.7
1.5
1.8
1.9
1.2
0.9
3.2
1.0
1.8
1.5
2.2

4.3
–2.2
–2.8
–0.6
6.8
6.9
8.0
4.9
4.7
0.1
–3.8
2.6
2.7
4.1
3.4
2.7
1.3

4.3
0.4
–0.2
1.9
6.4
6.7
7.1
4.9
3.1
–0.9
–3.6
2.3
5.0
1.7
1.4
–1.6
0.3

4.6
2.1
1.8
2.9
6.5
6.8
6.7
5.2
4.5
1.2
0.7
2.1
2.6
0.1
2.6
0.8
0.7

2.3
4.7
2.6
2.7

2.0
3.6
5.1
2.5

2.8

Projections
2017
2018
3.7
3.7
2.2
1.9
2.3
2.3
2.2
1.7
2.2
1.8
2.1
1.4
1.5
1.0
3.1
2.1
1.4
0.5
1.3
1.5
3.0
2.0
2.5
2.6

2015
3.2
1.9
2.0
1.9
1.3
1.0
1.0
3.5
1.1
1.7
0.4
2.0

2016
3.2
2.0
1.8
1.9
1.9
1.2
1.2
3.0
1.7
1.9
2.0
2.5

4.9
2.1
1.6
3.3
6.5
6.5
7.4
5.2
3.5
1.9
1.5
1.9
3.5
1.1
3.4
1.9
1.1

4.4
–2.8
–3.3
...
6.9
6.8
8.9
4.9
4.8
–1.3
–5.8
2.5
...
4.3
...
...
0.3

4.2
0.6
0.3
...
6.2
6.8
5.6
4.8
3.8
–1.1
–2.5
2.3
...
2.2
...
...
0.4

5.0
1.9
1.9
...
6.6
6.5
7.9
5.3
2.6
1.7
1.9
1.0
...
0.6
...
...
1.1

5.2
2.2
2.0
...
6.5
6.5
7.4
5.2
4.7
2.0
1.8
3.2
...
1.4
...
...
0.8

2.3
4.6
2.2
3.0

2.1
5.2
3.2
3.1

2.3
...
...
2.4

2.1
...
...
2.6

2.2
...
...
3.1

2.0
...
...
3.0

2.4

4.2

4.0

...

...

...

...

4.6
–0.9

2.7
2.0

4.0
4.4

3.8
4.9

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

3.8
1.8

2.2
2.5

3.8
4.8

3.6
4.5

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

–47.2

–15.7

17.4

–0.2

–43.4

16.2

1.4

1.1

–17.5

–1.8

7.1

0.5

–19.1

9.9

3.1

0.6

0.3
4.7

0.8
4.3

1.7
4.2

1.7
4.4

0.4
4.6

1.2
3.7

1.5
3.9

1.9
3.7

London Interbank Offered Rate (percent)
On US Dollar Deposits (six month)
0.5
1.1
1.4
1.9
...
...
...
...
On Euro Deposits (three month)
0.0
–0.3
–0.3
–0.3
...
...
...
...
On Japanese Yen Deposits (six month)
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
...
...
...
...
5Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam.
6Simple average of prices of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil. The average price of oil in US dollars a barrel was $42.84 in
2016; the assumed price based on futures markets is $50.28 in 2017 and $50.17 in 2018.
7Excludes Argentina and Venezuela. See country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
8For World Output, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 90 percent of annual world output at purchasing-power-parity weights.
For Emerging Market and Developing Economies, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 80 percent of annual emerging market
and developing economies’ output at purchasing-power-parity weights.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

15

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

2018 (slightly stronger than the 1.8 percent growth
estimated for 2016). The forecast is 0.4 percentage
point and 0.3 percentage point higher for 2017 and
2018, respectively, relative to April. The increase
in growth in 2017 mostly reflects an acceleration
in exports in the context of the broader pickup
in global trade and continued strength in domestic demand growth supported by accommodative
financial conditions amid diminished political risk
and policy uncertainty. Growth is forecast to pick
up this year and moderate next year in Germany
(2.0 percent in 2017 and 1.8 percent in 2018), hold
steady this year and moderate next year in Spain
(3.1 percent in 2017 and 2.5 percent in 2018), rise
this year and next in France (1.6 percent in 2017
and 1.8 percent in 2018), and increase this year
and soften next year in Italy (1.5 percent in 2017
and 1.1 percent in 2018). The medium-term
outlook for the euro area remains subdued because
projected potential growth is held back by weak
productivity, adverse demographics and in some
countries, a public and private debt overhang.
•• Growth in the United Kingdom is projected to subside to 1.7 percent in 2017 and 1.5 percent in 2018.
The 0.3 percentage point downward revision to
the 2017 forecast relative to the April 2017 WEO
is driven by weaker-than-expected growth outturns
for the first two quarters of the year. The slowdown
is driven by softer growth in private consumption
as the pound’s depreciation weighed on household
real income. The medium-term growth outlook is
highly uncertain and will depend in part on the new
economic relationship with the EU and the extent
of the increase in barriers to trade, migration, and
cross-border financial activity.
•• In Japan, momentum is driven by the strengthening
of global demand and policy actions to sustain a
supportive fiscal stance, and is expected to continue in 2017, with growth forecast at 1.5 percent.
The pace of expansion is expected to weaken
thereafter (to 0.7 percent in 2018), based on the
assumption that fiscal support fades as currently
scheduled, private consumption growth moderates,
and the boost from 2020 Olympics-related private
investment is offset by higher imports and slower
projected growth in foreign demand. Over the
medium term, a shrinking Japanese labor force will
curtail GDP growth although, in per capita income
terms, Japan’s growth is projected to remain close to
recent averages.
16

•• In most other advanced economies, the pace of
activity is expected to accelerate.
oo Growth in oil-exporting advanced economies is
projected to recover. In 2017, it is forecast to rise
to 1.4 percent in Norway, and increase (by about
1½ percentage points) to 3.0 percent in Canada.
This growth pickup reflects reduced drag from
the adjustment to lower oil and gas prices and
accommodative fiscal and monetary policies. By
contrast, growth is expected to soften temporarily
to 2.2 percent in Australia, where housing investment and mining exports in the first half of the
year were undermined by bad weather.
oo A pickup in growth for 2017 is projected in Korea
(to 3.0 percent), Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region (to 3.5 percent), Taiwan Province of China
(to 2.0 percent), and Singapore (to 2.5 percent).
A common driver behind this projected pickup
(which is generally stronger than projected in the
April 2017 WEO) is the recovery in global trade
and China’s import demand.
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
•• In China, growth is projected to notch up to
6.8 percent in 2017, and to slow to 6.5 percent
in 2018. The upward revision to the 2017 forecast—0.2 percentage point relative to the April
2017 WEO—reflects the stronger-than-expected
outturn in the first half of the year underpinned by
previous policy easing and supply-side reforms. For
2018, the upward revision of 0.3 percentage point
mainly reflects an expectation that the authorities
will maintain a sufficiently expansionary policy mix
(especially through high public investment) to meet
their target of doubling real GDP between 2010
and 2020. Growth rates for 2019–22 have similarly
been revised upward by 0.2 percentage point, on
average, reflecting the assumed delay in withdrawing
stimulus. Delay comes at the cost of further large
increases in debt, however, so downside risks around
this baseline have also increased.
•• In the rest of emerging market and developing Asia,
growth is expected to be vigorous and marginally
higher than in the April 2017 WEO. Strong government spending and data revisions in India led to
an upward revision of 2016 growth to 7.1 percent
(6.8 percent in April), with upward revisions of
about 0.2 percentage point, on average, for 2014
and 2015. However, the growth projection for 2017
has been revised down to 6.7 percent (7.2 percent in

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

April), reflecting still lingering disruptions associated
with the currency exchange initiative introduced in
November 2016, as well as transition costs related to
the launch of the national Goods and Services Tax
in July 2017. The latter move, which promises the
unification of India’s vast domestic market, is among
several key structural reforms under implementation that are expected to help push growth above
8 percent in the medium term. In the ASEAN-5
economies (Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam), growth is expected to strengthen in
2017 to 5.2 percent (from 5 percent in April), partly
because of stronger-than-expected external demand
from China and Europe. Specifically, economic
activity in 2017 is projected to expand by 5.2 percent in Indonesia, 5.4 percent in Malaysia, 6.6 percent in the Philippines, 3.7 percent in Thailand, and
6.3 percent in Vietnam.
•• In Latin America and the Caribbean, where GDP
contracted by almost 1 percent in 2016, real GDP
is projected to increase by 1.2 percent in 2017 and
1.9 percent in 2018—broadly as in the April 2017
WEO. Although growth is holding up well in Central America and strengthening, on average, in the
Caribbean, domestic demand continues to underperform in much of the rest of the region, and some
idiosyncratic factors are playing a key role in shaping
substantially different outlooks across countries.
oo In Mexico, growth is expected to soften to
2.1 percent in 2017 and 1.9 percent in 2018.
Despite the uncertainty related to renegotiation
of the North American Free Trade Agreement and
a downward revision to economic activity in the
United States, growth for 2017 has been revised
upward by 0.4 percent since the April 2017
WEO, reflecting better-than-expected growth
outturns for the first two quarters of the year and
a recovery in financial market confidence. In the
medium term, the assumed full implementation
of the structural reform agenda is projected to lift
growth to 2.7 percent.
oo After entering positive territory in the first half
of 2017, growth in Brazil is expected to reach
0.7 percent for the year and 1.5 percent in 2018.
A bumper crop and a boost to consumption,
including from allowing workers to draw on savings accumulated in their severance accounts, led
to an upward revision of half a percentage point
in 2017 relative to the April forecast, but ongoing
weakness in investment and an increase in polit-

Global Prospects and Policies

ical and policy uncertainty led to a downward
revision of the 2018 forecast of 0.2 percentage
point. A gradual restoration of confidence—as
key reforms to ensure fiscal sustainability are
implemented over time—is projected to raise
growth to 2 percent in the medium term.
oo In Argentina, growth is projected to rebound to
2.5 percent in 2017 from last year’s recession as
higher real wages boost consumption; investment
picks up, supported by public works; and exports
benefit from stronger external demand. Growth
is expected to remain about 2½ percent in 2018,
as private domestic demand continues to improve
gradually against the backdrop of tight macroeconomic policy settings (high real interest rates
required by the disinflation process and the start
of the fiscal consolidation). The intensification
of the political crisis in Venezuela weighs heavily on economic activity, which is expected to
contract by more than 10 percent in 2017 as oil
production declines and uncertainty rises further.
In Chile, growth is projected to be 1.4 percent in
2017 amid weakness in private fixed investment,
mining output, and public consumption, and
to recover to 2.5 percent in 2018 amid growing
confidence, higher copper prices, and interest
rate cuts implemented over the past few months.
In Colombia, growth is projected to be 1.7 percent in 2017, amid continued adjustment to
lower revenues. Higher infrastructure spending,
investment-friendly tax reform, and the boost in
confidence from the peace agreement are expected
to raise growth to about 3.5 percent in the
medium term.
•• The outlook for the Commonwealth of Independent States continues to improve, following a deep
recession in 2015 and very shallow growth in 2016,
with growth projected at 2.1 percent in 2017 and
2018—an upward revision of 0.4 percentage point
for 2017 relative to the April 2017 WEO. After two
years of recession, economic activity in Russia is projected to expand by 1.8 percent in 2017, helped by
stabilizing oil prices, easing financial conditions, and
improved confidence. Over the medium term, however, growth is expected to remain about 1.5 percent, constrained by moderate oil prices, adverse
demographics, and other structural impediments.
Among other oil exporters, growth in Kazakhstan is
projected to rise to 3.3 percent in 2017 on the back
of strong oil production.
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

17

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

•• In emerging and developing Europe, short-term
growth has been revised upward to 4.5 percent
(from 3.0 percent in the April 2017 WEO).
This change is driven to an important extent
by the revision to Turkey’s growth in 2017 to
5.1 percent (2.5 percent in April), reflecting a
stronger-than-expected outturn in the first quarter
of the year, driven in part by a recovery in exports
after several quarters of contraction and a more
expansionary fiscal stance. The outlook was also
revised up for Poland (to 3.8 percent in 2017 and
3.3 percent in 2018), reflecting better-than-expected
growth in the first half of 2017 and the expected
pickup in EU-funded projects.
•• Economic growth in sub-Saharan Africa is projected to reach 2.6 percent in 2017 and 3.4 percent
in 2018 (broadly in line with the April forecast),
with sizable differences across countries. Downside
risks have risen because of idiosyncratic factors in
the region’s largest economies and delays in implementing policy adjustments. Beyond the near term,
growth is expected to rise gradually, but barely above
population growth, as large consolidation needs
weigh on public spending. Nigeria is expected to
emerge from the 2016 recession caused by low oil
prices and the disruption of oil production. Growth
in 2017 is projected at 0.8 percent, owing to recovering oil production and ongoing strength in the
agricultural sector. However, concerns about policy
implementation, market segmentation in a foreign
exchange market that remains dependent on central
bank interventions (despite initial steps to liberalize
the foreign exchange market), and banking-system
fragilities are expected to weigh on activity in the
medium term. In South Africa, growth is projected to remain subdued at 0.7 percent in 2017
and 1.1 percent in 2018, despite more favorable
commodity export prices and strong agricultural
production, as heightened political uncertainty
saps consumer and business confidence. In Angola,
growth in 2017 has been revised upward to 1.5 percent (1.3 percent in April) because a downward
revision to oil production in 2016 has raised the
extent of the expected rebound. The outlook for
fuel-importing countries is generally brighter, with
an aggregate growth rate of 3.9 percent in 2017,
rising to 4.4 percent in 2018.
•• In the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan, growth is projected to slow significantly
in 2017 to 2.6 percent (from 5.0 percent in 2016)
18

on the back of a slowdown in the Islamic Republic
of Iran’s economy after very fast growth in 2016
and cuts in oil production in oil exporters through
March 2018 under the extended OPEC agreement.
In 2018, growth is expected to increase to 3.5 percent, mostly reflecting stronger domestic demand
in oil importers and a rebound of oil production
in oil exporters. However, regional insecurity and
geopolitical risks still weigh on the outlook. In
Saudi Arabia, although non-oil growth is expected
to strengthen somewhat this year, overall output is
expected to be broadly flat as real oil GDP declines
as a result of the commitments under the extended
OPEC agreement. In 2018, growth is projected to
increase to 1.1 percent, reflecting an increase in oil
output associated with the expiration of the OPEC
agreement. Economic prospects in Pakistan have
improved, with growth expected to reach 5.3 percent in 2017 and 5.6 percent in 2018, benefiting
from investment in the China-Pakistan Economic
Corridor and strong private sector credit. In Egypt,
growth was 4.1 percent in fiscal year 2017 according
to preliminary estimates, and is forecast to reach
4.5 percent in 2018, supported by reforms aimed at
correcting fiscal and external imbalances, restoring
competitiveness, and creating jobs.

Inflation Outlook for 2017–18
Headline inflation rates are projected to increase
in both advanced and emerging market and developing economies, though somewhat less briskly than
anticipated in the April 2017 WEO, partly reflecting
weaker-than-expected oil prices. In advanced economies, inflation is forecast to pick up from 0.8 percent
in 2016 to 1.7 percent in 2017, reflecting the continued cyclical recovery in demand and the increase in
commodity prices in the second half of 2016. Headline inflation is expected to stay at 1.7 percent in 2018
before converging to 2 percent over the medium term.
Inflation in emerging market and developing economies (excluding Argentina and Venezuela) is projected
to remain roughly stable in 2017 and 2018 (at 4.2 percent and 4.4 percent, respectively—close to the 2016
estimate of 4.3 percent).
•• Because of weaker fuel prices and negative shocks
linked to cell phone prices and prescription drugs,
headline inflation in the United States is expected
to increase by less than envisioned in the April
2017 WEO, though it will still increase signifi-

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

cantly. Consumer price inflation is projected to
reach 2.1 percent in 2017 (2.7 percent in the
April WEO), up from 1.3 percent in 2016. Core
personal consumer expenditure inflation remains
subdued and is projected to rise more slowly, slightly
exceeding 2 percent in 2019 before returning to the
medium-term objective of 2 percent targeted by the
Federal Reserve.
•• Inflation is also projected to pick up in the euro
area, from 0.2 percent in 2016 to 1.5 percent this
year, mostly reflecting higher energy prices and the
ongoing cyclical recovery in demand. But underlying inflation remains stubbornly low and wage
growth subdued amid still-high unemployment in
some countries. Headline inflation is projected to
converge to core inflation as energy price effects
dissipate and gradually approach the European Central Bank’s objective of below but close to 2 percent
over the next few years, reaching 1.9 percent only
in 2021. In the United Kingdom, the headline
inflation rate is projected to peak at 2.6 percent this
year, up from 0.7 percent in 2016, before gradually
declining to the Bank of England’s target of 2 percent as the temporary effect of the pound’s depreciation wanes and inflation expectations remain
well anchored.
•• Headline inflation rates are expected to return to
positive territory in all advanced economies that
experienced deflation in 2016. In particular, headline inflation in Japan, after being slightly negative
in 2016, is expected to increase to 0.4 percent in
2017 on the back of higher energy prices on a
year-over-year basis and a narrowing output gap.
But inflation rates are projected to remain below
the Bank of Japan’s target throughout the forecast horizon.
•• The modest increase in inflation rates projected
for emerging market and developing economies as
a group conceals sizable cross-country differences.
Headline inflation in China is expected to remain
tame at 1.8 percent in 2017, reflecting weakening
food prices in recent months, and to pick up gradually to 2.6 percent over the medium term. Inflation
rates in Brazil and Russia are forecast to decline
faster than projected in the April 2017 WEO,
reflecting stronger effects from negative output
gaps, currency appreciations, and favorable supply
shocks to food prices. In Mexico, headline inflation
is expected to rise to 5.9 percent this year because
of the liberalization of domestic fuel prices and

Global Prospects and Policies

pass-through from the peso’s depreciation through
January 2017, and to fall within Banco de México’s
tolerance band of 2–4 percent in 2018. In Argentina, annual consumer price index inflation is projected to decline sharply during 2017 and 2018 as
the impacts of the large exchange rate depreciation
and tariff adjustment in 2016 fade, the central bank
maintains a tight monetary policy stance, and wage
negotiations become more forward looking. After
rising to 6.3 percent in 2016, headline inflation in
South Africa is forecast to decline to 5.4 percent in
2017, which is within the target band; slowing wage
growth, a widening output gap, and the easing of
drought conditions are expected to more than offset
the effect of higher oil prices and an increase in
excise taxes. The inflation rate in Turkey has spiked,
following the lira’s depreciation, and is expected to
remain above the 5 percent target throughout the
forecast horizon. Inflation in 2017–18 is expected
to remain elevated at two-digit levels in Angola
and Nigeria, reflecting the persistent effects of past
inflationary shocks coming from sharp currency
depreciations (including of the parallel exchange
rate) as well as higher electricity and fuel prices and,
in the case of Nigeria, reflecting the assumption
that monetary policy will remain accommodative
going forward.

External Sector Outlook
Global trade is estimated to have grown by 2.4 percent in 2016 in volume terms, the slowest pace
since 2009, with weak growth in both advanced
economies and emerging market and developing
economies. In the former, weaker trade growth was
related to an investment slowdown and inventory
adjustment, especially during the first part of the
year. In the latter, persistent weakness in trade growth
was related to a protracted trade slowdown in China
and a sharp import contraction in some commodity
exporters facing macroeconomic strains, notably Latin
America, sub-Saharan Africa, and the Commonwealth of Independent States. As discussed earlier,
global trade growth picked up meaningfully in late
2016 and early 2017, reflecting a recovery in global
demand and especially capital spending. Consequently,
global trade growth is projected to rebound to about
4 percent in 2017 and into the medium term, about
1 percentage point higher than GDP growth at market
exchange rates.
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

19

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 1.14. Global Current Account Balances
Global current account imbalances narrowed marginally in 2016 and are expected
to further compress slightly in 2017.
1. Global Current Account Balance
(Percent of World GDP)
4
Afr. and ME
Japan
Eur. creditors
Adv. Asia
3

China
Oil exporters

2
1
0
–1
–2
–3

Change in current-account-to-GDP
ratio, 2016–17

–4
2002

2.5

United States
Eur. debtors
04

06

Other adv.
Lat. Am.
08

10

Em. Asia
CEE

12

14

18

20

22

2. International Investment Position 2016 and Change in Current
Account Balance (Percent of GDP)

2.0

Oil exporters

1.5
1.0
0.5

16

Discrepancy

Afr. and ME
Eur. debtors

0.0

Other adv.
Lat. Am.

Eur. creditors

United States

–0.5

CEE Em. Asia

–1.0
–1.5
–100

–50

Japan

China

Adv. Asia

0
Net IIP, 2016

50

100

150

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Adv. Asia = advanced Asia (Hong Kong SAR, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan
Province of China); Afr. and ME = Africa and the Middle East (Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Morocco, South
Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Tunisia); CEE = central and eastern Europe (Belarus,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic,
Turkey, Ukraine); Em. Asia = emerging Asia (India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Philippines,
Thailand, Vietnam); Eur. creditors = European creditors (Austria, Belgium, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland); Eur.
debtors = European debtors (Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Spain,
Slovenia); Lat. Am. = Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico,
Peru, Uruguay); Oil exporters = Algeria, Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela; Other
adv. = other advanced economies (Australia, Canada, France, Iceland, New
Zealand, United Kingdom).

Global current account imbalances have been broadly
unchanged since 2013, with a marginal narrowing
in 2016 that is projected to continue in 2017 and the
following few years (Figure 1.14, panel 1). Their composition has shifted, becoming more heavily concentrated in
advanced economies. Among creditor countries, the current account balance is projected to show some improvement in oil-exporting countries, thanks to the increase in
oil prices since their 2016 troughs, and to decline slightly
20

in China as imports recover. Among debtor countries,
current account deficits are expected to moderate in countries in the “other advanced economies” group, including
Australia and especially the United Kingdom.
Although there is no normative presumption that
current account deficits and surpluses should be compressed, the IMF’s 2017 External Sector Report highlights
how in 2016 current account imbalances in some of the
world’s largest economies were too large in relation to
country-specific norms consistent with underlying fundamentals and desirable policies. Current account balances
are expected to move in a direction consistent with a
narrowing of these excess imbalances, even under the
assumption of constant real exchange rates underpinning
the projections. The first panel of Figure 1.15 depicts
on the horizontal axis the gap between the 2016 current
account balance and its norm and, on the vertical axis,
the projected change in the current account balance in
2017. The strong negative correlation (–0.6) implies that
current account balances are expected to begin reducing
gaps relative to the 2016 current account norm. The
correlation is even stronger over a five-year horizon.
As panel 2 of Figure 1.15 illustrates, changes in real
effective exchange rates between their 2016 average
values and those in August 2017 are instead not
systematically correlated with the exchange rate gaps
for 2016 identified in the 2017 External Sector Report.
One important factor reconciling these findings is
the increase in commodity prices since their troughs
in 2016, which has strengthened the real exchange
rates of commodity exporters but is also expected to
improve their current account balances.
Despite the minor narrowing of flow imbalances,
creditor and debtor positions widened in 2016 and
are projected to continue widening into the medium
term relative to world GDP (Figure 1.16, panel 1).
On the debtor side, the increase is explained entirely
by an increase in net external liabilities in the United
States, where the current account deficit is projected
to remain about 2.5 percent of GDP over the next few
years. In contrast, net external liabilities are projected
to shrink further in euro area debtor countries. Among
creditor countries, the increase in net external claims
primarily reflects the projected continuation of large
current account surpluses in European creditor countries (such as Germany, the Netherlands, and Switzerland) and advanced Asian economies.
Panel 2 of Figure 1.16 shows how creditor and debtor
positions as a share of domestic GDP are projected
to evolve over the next five years. It highlights further

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Figure 1.16. Net International Investment Positions

Figure 1.15. Real Exchange Rates and Current Account
Balances in Relation to Economic Fundamentals

Creditor and debtor international investment positions widened in 2016 and are
projected to continue widening into the medium term.

Current account balances are expected to narrow their gaps relative to the 2016
current account norm.

1. Global International Investment Position
(Percent of world GDP)
40
Afr. and ME
Japan
30
Eur. creditors
Adv. Asia

SAU

4
3

GBR

2

ZAF

1

ITA

0
–1
–2
–10

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15

AUS

China
Oil exporters

20

RUS MEX
BRA
IDN

10

JPN
IND

0

MYS

SGP
BEL
FRA
DEU
USA EA CHE SWE
CHN
CAN
ESP
POL KOR THA
HKG
TUR
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
Current account gap, 2016

–10
–20

NLD

United States
Eur. debtors

–30
–40

8

2. Real Effective Exchange Rate Changes and Gaps
(Percent)
REER gap
REER change 2016–July 2017

Projected change in IIP, 2016 –22

Change in current account-toGDP ratio, 2016–17

1. 2016 Current Account Gaps and Change in Current Account
Balances, 2016–17
6
5

Global Prospects and Policies

2005

07

Other adv.
Lat. Am.

09

11

13

40

5For instance, valuation changes in 2016 were notable in the
United Kingdom, where depreciation of the pound turned the country into a net creditor as of 2016 by boosting the domestic-currency
value of foreign-currency assets. The depreciation of the US dollar so

17

19

21 22

30

CEE

0

Em. Asia

Afr. and ME
United States
–50

Adv. Asia

Eur. creditors

Lat. Am.

10

–10

Japan

Eur. debtors

20

China

Oil exporters

Other adv.
0

50

100

150

Net IIP, 2016

SAU TUR CAN RUS AUS CHN EA POL SWE THA KOR
USA GBR BRA ZAF IND IDN CHE JPN MYS MEX SGP

growth in creditor positions among European creditor
countries and advanced economies in Asia in the range of
20–25 percentage points of GDP; among debtor countries the largest reduction in net liabilities (close to 20 percentage points of GDP) is projected for euro area debtor
countries. A few debtor countries or country groups are
projected to see a modest deterioration in their net international investment position, with the US net external
position worsening by about 3.5 percentage points of
GDP. It is important to note that future exchange rate
changes will affect the evolution of these positions, not
only through their effect on the current account balance,
but also through valuation effects.5 Most countries,

15

2. Net International Investment Position, 2016, and Projected
Changes, 2016–22 (Percent of GDP)

–20
–100

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) country codes. EA = euro area; REER = real effective exchange rate.

Em. Asia
CEE

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Adv. Asia = advanced Asia (Hong Kong SAR, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan
Province of China); Afr. and ME = Africa and the Middle East (Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Morocco, South
Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Tunisia); CEE = central and eastern Europe (Belarus,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic,
Turkey, Ukraine); Em. Asia = emerging Asia (India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Philippines,
Thailand, Vietnam); Eur. creditors = European creditors (Austria, Belgium, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland); Eur.
debtors = European debtors (Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Spain,
Slovenia); Lat. Am. = Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico,
Peru, Uruguay); Oil exporters = Algeria, Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela; Other
adv. = Other advanced economies (Australia, Canada, France, Iceland, New
Zealand, United Kingdom).

especially advanced economies, are net creditors in foreign
currency and net borrowers in domestic currency; consequently, an exchange rate depreciation implies improvement in the net external position through an increase in
the domestic-currency value of net foreign-currency assets,
with an appreciation having the opposite effect.
far in 2017, if not reversed, would similarly contribute to reducing
the United States’ net external liability position.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

21

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

The shifting constellation of global macroeconomic
policies and associated exchange rate movements could
lead flow imbalances to widen again, further expanding
stock imbalances. In the future, stronger reliance on
domestic demand growth in some creditor countries,
especially those with the policy space to support it,
would help facilitate domestic and global rebalancing
while sustaining world growth. In the United States,
which already has close to full employment, fiscal
policy measures designed to gradually enhance productive capacity along with demand, anchored in a
medium-term fiscal consolidation plan to reverse the
rising ratio of public debt to GDP, would result in more
sustained growth and help contain external imbalances.

Risks
More Balanced, but Still to the Downside in
the Medium Term
In the near term, risks to the global growth forecast
appear two-sided and broadly balanced. On the upside,
momentum could prove to be more durable than
expected amid strong consumer and business confidence, for instance, in the euro area and in East Asia,
and near-term growth could exceed the forecast. On
the downside, policy uncertainty is more of a concern
than usual, reflecting, for example, difficult-to-predict
US regulatory and fiscal policies, the potential adoption of trade restrictions, negotiation of the United
Kingdom’s relationship with the EU post-Brexit, and
geopolitical risks. A perceived likelihood of more
inward-looking policies could trigger a correction in
asset valuations and an increase in financial market volatility from its current very low levels. In turn, a correction in asset valuations and higher financial market
volatility could knock down spending and confidence
more generally, especially in countries with financial
vulnerabilities. Finally, Hurricane Harvey creates
uncertainties for the US economy in the near term; the
net effect on GDP will depend on how quickly economic activity in the affected region recovers (including port activity and operations reliant on oil and gas
infrastructure) and then, on the upside, how large and
fast the rebuilding effort will be.
Beyond the immediate term, risks are skewed to the
downside and stem from a host of financial tensions,
a possible inward-looking policy shift and persistently
low inflation in advanced economies, and a range of
noneconomic factors.
22

Financial Tensions
Financial stability risks in China: The revised
growth forecast for China embeds slower rebalancing of activity toward services and consumption, a
higher debt trajectory, and diminished fiscal space
available to respond in case of an abrupt adjustment.
Unless the Chinese authorities counter the associated risks by accelerating their recent encouraging
efforts to curb the expansion of credit, these factors
imply a heightened probability of a sharp slowdown
in China’s growth. Such an adjustment could be
triggered, for instance, by a funding shock (in the
short-term interbank market or in the funding market
for wealth-management products), the imposition of
trade barriers by trading partners, or a return of capital
outflow pressures because of a faster-than-expected
normalization of US interest rates. A growth slowdown
in China would have adverse repercussions for other
economies through weaker trade, commodity prices,
and confidence.
Tightening of global financial conditions: Continued
easy monetary conditions in advanced economies can
seed excesses and leave the financial system (and the
economic recovery) vulnerable to an abrupt decompression of risk premiums. Chapter 1 of the October
2017 GFSR presents a downside scenario in which
these risks materialize, entailing a sizable output cost.
An eventual repricing of risk could be triggered by a
multitude of shocks, including faster-than-expected
normalization of US monetary policy or a rise in
global risk aversion. As discussed in the October
2017 GFSR, the search for yield amid historically low
interest rates has pushed investors to move beyond
their traditional risk mandates and is already causing
a buildup of credit and liquidity risks and increased
vulnerability to market risks in some countries and
market segments. For instance, in the United States,
credit risks are rising, as suggested by rising leverage in
parts of the non-energy corporate sector and evidence
of an erosion of underwriting standards in the corporate bond market. Even as the strength and health
of banking systems continue to improve, policies still
have a vital role to play in managing risks in the nonbank financial sector.
Risks of capital flow reversals: Corporate leverage
has increased substantially in several emerging market
economies (in addition to China) since the global
financial crisis, with high levels of foreign currency–
denominated corporate debt issuance. As discussed in
the April 2017 GFSR, corporate leverage has started to

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

decline from peak levels in some economies, reflecting,
in part, a downturn in capital expenditure in extractive
industries. Against this backdrop, net financial flows
to emerging market and developing economies have
picked up over the past year, as the current account
balances of commodity exporters have shrunk and
global risk appetite has recovered. Following a period
of abundant credit supply, a sudden tightening of
global financial conditions could expose financial
fragilities, especially where buffers may be wearing thin
after a period of macroeconomic strains and financial
volatility. For instance, faster-than-expected monetary
policy normalization in the United States could cause
reversals in capital flows to emerging markets and an
appreciation of the US dollar, imposing strains on
economies with high leverage, balance sheet mismatches, or exchange rates pegged to the US dollar. At
the same time, to the extent that such monetary policy
tightening reflects a stronger outlook for the US economy, US trading partners would benefit from positive
demand spillovers.
Challenges facing euro area banks: The euro area
banking sector has made further progress with balance
sheet cleanup since the spring, and bank credit growth
to the nonfinancial private sector has been positive
since mid-2015 (though below GDP growth). Nonetheless, nonperforming loan (NPL) ratios were still
high in the first quarter of 2017, at about 5.7 percent for the euro area, and greater than 10 percent
in six countries (including Italy, which accounts
for about 30 percent of the euro area’s NPL stock).
Profitability also remains a challenge, with stubbornly
high cost-to-asset ratios, especially for medium- and
small-size banks. As discussed in Chapter 1 of the
October 2017 GFSR, about one-third of global systemically important banks (mostly European banks)
are not expected by analysts to generate sustainable
returns, even by 2019. Low earnings hinder banks’
ability to build cushions against unexpected losses and
to raise capital in markets. Without a more concerted
effort to clean up balance sheets and improve banks’
cost efficiency, financial stability concerns and fears of
adverse feedback loops among weak demand, prices,
and balance sheets could be reignited in parts of
the euro area. If political risks were to reemerge, for
instance, an accompanying rise in long-term interest
rates would worsen public debt dynamics, especially if
inflation were to remain weak.
Financial deregulation: As discussed in Box 1.2 of
the April 2017 GFSR, a broad rollback of the strength-

Global Prospects and Policies

ening of financial regulation and oversight achieved
since the global financial crisis—both nationally and
internationally—could lower capital and liquidity buffers or weaken supervisory effectiveness, with negative
repercussions for global financial stability.
A Retreat from Cross-Border Economic Integration
Slow growth in median incomes since the global
financial crisis and a longer-term trend of worsening
income distributions have contributed to disillusionment with globalization in advanced economies—
notably in the United States and parts of Europe. Over
the longer term, a failure to lift potential growth and
make growth more inclusive in advanced economies
could exacerbate the risk of a retreat from cross-border
integration and hinder the political consensus for
necessary market-friendly reforms. Greater protectionism could disrupt global supply chains (Yi 2003;
Bems, Johnson, and Yi 2010; Koopman, Wang, and
Wei 2014), reduce global productivity, and make
tradable consumer goods less affordable, harming
low-income households disproportionately (Fajgelbaum
and Khandelwal 2016). Similarly, indiscriminate curbs
on immigration would hinder a channel for alleviating
labor force constraints in aging societies and reduce
opportunities for skills specialization and productivity
growth over the long term.6
Persistently Low Inflation in Advanced Economies
In many advanced economies, steady progress
toward central bank inflation targets has been elusive,
reflecting in part the slow reduction of spare capacity in labor markets. An environment of persistently
subdued inflation (which could ensue if domestic
demand were to falter) can carry significant risks
by leading to a belief that central banks are willing
to accept below-target inflation, thereby reducing
medium-term inflation expectations.7 Low inflation
and interest rates would reduce central banks’ capacity to lower real interest rates to restore full employment in an economic downturn. Real wages would
also be less flexible, and when demand falters, firms
would be more likely to resort to laying off workers
to reduce costs, amplifying the recessionary impulse.
In sum, prolonged below-target inflation deepens the
6Chapter 4 of the October 2016 WEO analyzes the impact of
immigration flows on productivity growth in recipient countries.
7Chapter 3 of the October 2016 WEO provides a fuller
discussion.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

23

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 1.17. Geopolitical Risk Index
(Index)

Geopolitical risks have risen in recent months.
600

Iraq
invasion

500

400

London
bombing
9/11

Madrid
bombing Iran nuclear
tensions

300

Russian
annexation
of Crimea Paris
attacks
ISIS
Syrian
civil war escalation
escalation
Arab Spring:
Syrian and
Libyan wars

200

100

0

and southern Africa. If these factors intensify, the hardship in directly affected countries, especially smaller
developing economies, would rise commensurately.
The risks discussed above are interdependent
and can be mutually reinforcing. For example, a
shift toward inward-looking policy approaches to
cross-border trade, investment, and migration can
increase geopolitical tensions and global risk aversion. In addition, noneconomic shocks can weigh
directly on near-term economic activity and hurt
longer-term confidence and market sentiment. Also,
faster-than-anticipated tightening of global financial
conditions or a shift toward protectionism in advanced
economies could create capital outflow pressures from
emerging markets.

Fan Chart
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Aug.
17

Source: Caldara and Iacoviello (2017).
Note: ISIS = Islamic State.

downside risks to advanced economies’ medium-term
growth prospects.
Noneconomic Factors
Rising geopolitical tensions and domestic political discord can hurt global market sentiment and
confidence, burdening economic activity. For many
countries severely affected by such factors, the baseline scenario assumes a gradual easing of tensions.
However, these episodes may turn out to be more
protracted, delaying recovery in these economies. Measures of geopolitical risk have risen in recent months
(Figure 1.17), and recent research shows that higher
geopolitical tensions can weigh on global activity.8
Weak governance and large-scale corruption can also
undermine confidence and popular support, taking a
heavy toll on domestic activity. Other noneconomic
factors weighing on growth in certain regions include
the damaging effect of weather-related disasters,
including the persistent effects of drought in eastern
8Caldara and Iacoviello (2017) construct an index of geopolitical risk and document how increases in the index have historically
been associated with negative effects on a broad set of economic
activity indicators.

24

A fan chart analysis—based on equity and commodity market data as well as the dispersion of
inflation and term spread projections of private sector
forecasters—yields a balance of risks that remains
slightly tilted to the downside for 2017 and 2018 (Figure 1.18). Despite the broadly unchanged balance of
risks around the global growth forecast, the contributions of selected risk factors have changed. Relative to
the estimates made in October 2016, the distribution
of term premiums forecasts and the prices of S&P 500
Index options now imply more upside risk to growth
in 2017 and less upside risk to growth in 2018, likely
reflecting less upbeat views for US fiscal stimulus over
the medium term and optimistic valuations in the
US stock market—both of which leave less room for
upward surprises. At the same time, the distribution of
inflation forecasts and oil price options imply somewhat more downside risk than a year ago, suggesting
that analysts see greater scope for inflation and oil
prices to surprise on the upside and dampen growth
(an upward surprise in inflation could lead central
banks to tighten monetary policy earlier than markets
currently predict, while higher-than-expected oil prices
would subtract from consumer disposable income).
The probability of a recession over a four-quarter
horizon has declined relative to the probability computed in March 2017 in the euro area, Japan, and
the Latin America 5 group (Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Mexico, and Peru), consistent with higher projected
growth rates. Recession probabilities are broadly
unchanged for the United States and other regions
(Figure 1.19). Deflation risks—as measured by the esti-

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

mated probability of a decline in the price level four
quarters ahead—have declined for the euro area and
Japan, reflecting stronger projected growth in domestic
demand. Deflation probabilities have increased slightly
from low levels in the East Asia region, where inflation
has softened in several economies in recent months,
and for the Latin America 5 group, where inflation is
projected to decline further over the coming year (as
pass-through from earlier currency depreciations fade
and negative output gaps continue to exert downward
pressure on inflation in some economies).

Policy Priorities
The main cross-cutting policy challenges are to
boost potential output and ensure that its benefits are
broadly shared, and to build resilience against downside risks. With countries now facing divergent cyclical
conditions, varied monetary and fiscal policy stances
remain appropriate—and completing the economic
recovery and adopting strategies to ensure fiscal sustainability are still imperatives for many economies.
The urgency for structural reform is particularly
high in advanced economies, where crisis legacies,
demographic shifts, and continued weak productivity
trends are restraining potential growth; but also in
many emerging market and developing economies,
many of which need to activate new sources of growth.
The cyclical upswing opens an ideal window of
opportunity for making progress with reforms, especially those that have more powerful economic benefits
when implemented in times of strong demand (such as
reforms to job protection and unemployment benefits,
as discussed in Chapter 2 of the April 2016 WEO). By
the same token, where aggregate demand is still weak,
macroeconomic policy needs to be supportive to foster
reform implementation.
By acting together, policymakers could amplify the
beneficial effects of reforms and help reduce downside risks to the outlook. The model simulations in
Scenario Box 1 show that the IMF’s macroeconomic
policy advice for the Group of Twenty economies
(in addition to what is already assumed in the WEO
baseline) would have key global benefits, especially if
implemented at the same time. The policy stimulus in
countries with fiscal space would strengthen external
demand for countries needing fiscal consolidation,
buffering the near-term drag on activity; in advanced
economies, tightening policy, the net effect on output
of spillovers from abroad and domestic policy tight-

Global Prospects and Policies

Figure 1.18. Risks to the Global Outlook
The balance of risks implied by the fan chart analysis is slightly tilted to the
downside in 2017 and 2018.
1
5 1. Prospects for World GDP Growth
(Percent change)

4
WEO baseline

3
2
1

50 percent conﬁdence interval
70 percent conﬁdence interval
90 percent conﬁdence interval
90 percent conﬁdence interval from October 2016 WEO

0
2014

15

16

17

18

1.5 2. Balance of Risks Associated with Selected Risk Factors 2
(Coefﬁcient of skewness expressed in units of the underlying
1.0
variables)
0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0 Balance of risks for
–1.5

Term spread

Current year (October 2016 WEO)
Current year (October 2017 WEO)
Next year (October 2016 WEO)
Next year (October 2017 WEO)
S&P 500

Inﬂation risk

Oil market risks

Dispersion of Forecasts and Implied Volatility 3
80 3.
70
60

GDP (right scale)
VIX (left scale)

50

1.2

125

1.0

100

0.8

75

0.6

50

0.4

25

4.

Term spread
(right scale)
Oil (left scale)

0.4
0.3

40
30
20
10
0
2006 08

0.5

10

12

14

0.2
Aug.
17

0.2

0
2006 08 10 12 14

0.1
Aug.
17

Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE); Consensus
Economics; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates.
1The fan chart shows the uncertainty around the October 2017 World Economic
Outlook (WEO) central forecast with 50, 70, and 90 percent conﬁdence intervals. As
shown, the 70 percent conﬁdence interval includes the 50 percent interval, and the
90 percent conﬁdence interval includes the 50 and 70 percent intervals. See
Appendix 1.2 of the April 2009 WEO for details. The 90 percent intervals for the
current-year and one-year-ahead forecasts from the October 2016 WEO are shown.
2The bars depict the coefﬁcient of skewness expressed in units of the underlying
variables. The values for inﬂation risks and oil market risks enter with the opposite
sign since they represent downside risks to growth.
3GDP measures the purchasing-power-parity-weighted average dispersion of GDP
growth forecasts for the Group of Seven economies (Canada, France, Germany,
Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States), Brazil, China, India, and Mexico. VIX is
the CBOE Standard & Poor’s (S&P) 500 Implied Volatility Index. Term spread
measures the average dispersion of term spreads implicit in interest rate forecasts
for Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Oil is the CBOE
crude oil volatility index. Forecasts are from Consensus Economics surveys. Dashed
lines represent the average values from 2000 to the present.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

25

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 1.19. Recession and Deﬂation Risks

Policies—Advanced Economies

(Percent)

Relative to the spring, recession probabilities have declined for the euro area, Japan,
and the Latin America 5 group and are broadly unchanged for the United States and
other regions. Deﬂation risks have declined for Japan and the euro area.
70

1. Probability of Recession, 2017:Q4–2018:Q3

60

April 2017 WEO: 2017:Q2–2018:Q1

50
40
30
20
10
0

30

United
States

Euro area

Japan

East Asia

Latin
America 5

Rest of the
world

2. Probability of Deﬂation, 2018:Q41
April 2017 WEO: 2018:Q2

25
20
15
10
5
0

United
States

Euro area

Japan

East Asia

Latin
America 5

Rest of the
world

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: East Asia comprises China, Hong Kong SAR, India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia,
the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan Province of China, and Thailand; Latin America 5
comprises Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru; Rest of the world comprises
Argentina, Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Israel, New
Zealand, Norway, Russia, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United
Kingdom, and Venezuela. April 2017 WEO data refer to simulations run in March
2017. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1
Deﬂation is deﬁned as a fall in the price level on a year-over-year basis in the
quarter indicated in the ﬁgure.

ening would be positive. Overall, implementing the
recommended policies would increase global fiscal
sustainability and lead to permanently higher private
investment and potential output. The boost to global
demand would also magnify the effects of structural
reforms on potential output.9 Beyond these quantifiable macroeconomic benefits, the recommended policy
measures would also help reduce downside risks to the
global growth outlook.
9Based on IMF (2017d), which presents results for a similar scenario incorporating, in addition, the impact of structural reforms.

26

Although cyclical positions across advanced economies are varied, most of the larger economies are still
estimated to be operating somewhat below potential
and are experiencing inflation rates below central bank
targets (Figure 1.20). Potential growth faces headwinds
from population aging and a widespread slowdown in
productivity growth.
Although income distribution has remained broadly
stable in most advanced economies in recent years,
ongoing advances in labor-saving technologies and
cross-border competition—important drivers of higher
income inequality during the past few decades—
suggest that inclusiveness cannot be taken for granted.
Deliberate policy efforts are needed in many countries
to ensure that most people see their living standards
improve as national income increases.
Safeguarding the Momentum and Addressing the
Remaining Crisis Legacies
With a lack of steady progress toward bringing inflation closer to target and stabilizing long-term inflation
expectations around those levels, monetary policy in
advanced economies should chart an accommodative
course. Although wage and price pressures are likely
to pick up once the recovery firms further, a tendency
for core inflation to repeatedly fall short of expectations calls for a cautious risk-management approach to
reducing accommodation or progressing with normalization. A generalized perception that central banks
will let inflation run below target for a prolonged
period could lead to a downshift of long-term inflation expectations, which, in an environment of low
equilibrium real interest rates, would be costlier and
more difficult to reverse than a temporary overshoot
in inflation.
The US Federal Reserve should stay on a data-​
dependent, well-communicated, and gradual path to
normalization. The Bank of Japan should maintain a
sustained accommodative stance, including its target for long-term interest rates. And the European
Central Bank should wait for concrete evidence of a
steady pickup in inflation before reducing the extent
of accommodation. At the same time, stretched asset
valuations and increasing leverage in some financial
market segments bear close monitoring, and proactive micro- and macroprudential supervision, where
necessary, remains important to ensure that appropriately easy monetary conditions do not fuel financial
stability risks.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Fiscal policy should, in principle, also be calibrated
with cyclical conditions but, in many advanced
economies with remaining slack, it is constrained
by the need to avoid potentially destabilizing public
debt dynamics or to rebuild buffers. Given the need
to secure the recovery and bolster inclusiveness, the
composition of spending and revenues and any consolidation measures should be made as growth- and
distribution-friendly as possible.
In the United States, where output is approaching
potential, the consolidation should start in 2018. And
in the short term, avoiding political brinkmanship over
appropriations and promptly raising the debt ceiling
are essential. In the euro area, countries with very low
deficits and relatively low debt should use fiscal space to
support structural reforms and boost public investment
to raise potential growth. For instance, a more expansionary stance in Germany, where tax buoyancy amid
an economic recovery is adding to fiscal space, would
permit a much-needed increase in public investment
while generating positive spillovers to countries with
deficient demand. Avoiding a re-emergence of fiscal surpluses would also help correct the external imbalances
of Germany. Indeed, as Chapter 4 emphasizes, higher
public spending designed to boost potential output can
have both domestic benefits as well as positive spillovers
to other economies, especially those with economic
slack and monetary accommodation. By contrast, gradual fiscal adjustment accompanied by growth-friendly
measures is appropriate for Italy and France. In view
of remaining economic slack and exceptionally weak
core inflation, Japan should withdraw fiscal support
very gradually, including through a gradual increase
in the consumption tax rate over several years to bring
the primary balance to a debt-stabilizing level, while
prioritizing demand-friendly structural reforms. In the
United Kingdom, where uncertainty about the outcome of negotiations with the EU weighs on sentiment
and investment, a gradual consolidation path remains
appropriate.
Strengthening resilience and securing the recovery in the euro area will also require accelerating the
repair of bank balance sheets and durably improving
banking system profitability. Only a comprehensive
and proactive approach to reducing NPLs can lift
the drag on credit growth and eliminate risks of an
adverse feedback mechanism among weak inflation,
balance sheets, investment, and productivity. Measures to accelerate the reduction of NPLs can include
broadening European Central Bank guidance on NPL

Global Prospects and Policies

Figure 1.20. Advanced Economy Output Gaps, 2017
(Percent of potential GDP)

Most large advanced economies are estimated to be operating below potential.
1.0

0.5

0.0
PPP GDP-weighted average
–0.5

–1.0

–1.5

–2.0

AUS FRA ITA KOR JPN CHE ESP TWN CAN GBR BEL USA NLD DEU SWE

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) country codes. PPP = purchasing power parity.

management to smaller banks, faster modernization
and harmonization of insolvency regimes, and stimulating distressed debt markets by facilitating national
asset-management firms. To raise bank profitability
sustainably, further business-model upgrading, cost
rationalization, and consolidation remain critical;
a proactive approach to bank resolution could help
provide incentives for action in these areas. Faster
progress is also needed for completing the Banking
Union (with a common, effective deposit insurance
scheme and common fiscal backstop) and advancing
the Capital Markets Union plan.
Bolstering Medium-Term Potential Output and
Inclusiveness
A cyclical upswing provides a golden opportunity
for adopting structural reforms and will amplify and
accelerate their beneficial effects. Policymakers can
safeguard and improve prospects for potential output
through measures to expand labor supply and create
an environment conducive to stronger productivity
growth. Many of these reforms would also help raise
the inclusiveness of income gains, and some would
broaden economic opportunities across the skills spectrum. Reform priorities vary across countries, dependInternational Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

27

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

ing on the key impediments to potential output, but
generally fall into the following areas:
•• Distribution-friendly fiscal policies: As discussed in
depth in the October 2017 Fiscal Monitor, governments seeking to improve equity in incomes and
opportunities can rely on fiscal policy as a powerful
redistributive tool. For many advanced economies
with high public debt, limited fiscal space, and high
tax and spending levels, fiscal and redistributive
objectives should be achieved through revenue-neutral
increases in tax progressivity, spending reallocations,
and improved spending efficiency. In advanced economies where tax progressivity has declined in the past
few decades, raising the top marginal tax rates and
reducing opportunities for tax avoidance and evasion,
especially for high-income earners, could improve the
distribution of income. Many advanced economies
also have room to significantly increase the taxation
of immobile capital and wealth.
•• Investment in human capital: Ensuring broad-based
access to high-quality education promotes productivity and a more equitable distribution of income
over the long term. It also raises the adaptability of
the workforce to structural transformation, including a persistent shift in work and employment
relations (with a greater incidence of part-time work
in many advanced economies and a greater share of
workers on temporary contracts), as highlighted in
Chapter 2. Short-term measures to help households
through economic downturns or technology- and
trade-related displacement include active labor market policies (that help workers find jobs in expanding sectors) and social safety nets (to smooth the
effects of temporary income loss and keep workers
attached to the labor force). In the longer term,
attaining inclusive and sustainable growth amid
continued structural change will require adequate
education, skills building and retraining, and policies (such as credit access) to facilitate geographic
mobility. In the United States, policy priorities
include supporting early childhood education and
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
programs, and rethinking the financing model for
public schools and funding for tertiary education
to improve outcomes for youth from lower- and
middle-income households. Apprenticeship and
vocational programs have worked well in some
countries to offer attractive careers (for example, in
Germany) and can be upgraded in many countries,
for instance, in France and the United States.
28

•• Investment in physical infrastructure: Empirical
evidence from advanced economies suggests that,
if done right, infrastructure investment brings
both short- and long-term benefits: an increase in
public investment of 1 percent of GDP can raise
the level of output by 1½ percent over the medium
term (Abiad, Furceri, and Topalova 2016). After
three decades of almost continuous decline, public
investment in infrastructure and the stock of public
capital as a share of output are near historic lows
in advanced economies. Many countries could take
advantage of the favorable funding environment to
improve the quality of the existing infrastructure
stock and implement new projects (see Chapter 3 of
the October 2014 WEO). Countries with deficits
in infrastructure include Australia, Canada, Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
Priorities vary but, in most cases, include upgrading
surface transportation and improving infrastructure
technologies (in high-speed rail, ports, telecommunications, broadband), as well as green investments.
•• Fostering greater labor supply: Population aging will
exert downward pressure on labor force participation
rates in most advanced economies in the coming
years, with growth in the workforce projected to
decline from about 0.8 percent a year in 1995–2015
to about half that rate by 2022 (based on October
2017 WEO forecasts). To counter this decline,
policymakers could raise the statutory retirement age
(where doing so would help close funding gaps in
pension systems) and take measures to accelerate the
narrowing of gender gaps in labor force participation. Gender gaps could be narrowed by eliminating
tax provisions that discourage second earners in
households (Italy, Japan, United States), ensuring
the availability of affordable child care (Canada,
Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United
States), fostering flexible work arrangements (Canada, Japan), and offering family-friendly benefits
such as parental leave (Canada, United States). In
aging societies, ensuring the affordability of elderly
care is also crucial, given that, if care is too expensive, it would typically be the secondary earners
in households—typically women—who shoulder
the burden of unpaid work at home. Immigration
reform could also help expand the labor force, limit
the increase in dependency ratios, and raise productivity and labor force growth in some countries
(through, for example, skills-based immigration
reform in the United States, continued targeted

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

immigration policy in Canada, and allowing
more use of foreign workers in Japan). In Europe,
integration of refugees into the workforce should
be facilitated through swift processing of asylum
applications, language training, job search assistance,
better recognition of migrants’ skills through credential systems, and support for entrepreneurship.
•• Product and labor market reforms: Persistently sluggish
productivity in some countries has led to greater
emphasis on product and labor market reforms,
especially given the scarcity of fiscal space. These
reforms have been found to raise productivity and
employment and to improve resilience to shocks.10
Priorities include lower barriers to entry into professional services, certain network industries, or retail
trade (for example, Australia, Greece, Italy, Japan,
Spain); employment protection legislation reforms to
reduce labor market duality, such as easing hiring and
dismissal regulations for regular workers (for example,
France, Portugal, Spain); reform of unemployment
insurance and strengthening of active labor market
policies and professional training and apprenticeship systems (for example, France); cutting of labor
tax wedges (France, Germany, Italy); and reform of
wage bargaining frameworks to ease the realignment
of wages with productivity (Italy, France). Some
countries also have scope to improve the business climate and the quality of public administration (Italy,
Portugal). At a central level, the EU has room to
provide better incentives for reforms at the national
level with targeted funds from the EU budget and
outcome-based benchmarking of reforms. Efforts to
deepen single market integration—especially in the
digital services, transport, and energy sectors—would
also help raise productivity in EU members.

Policies—Emerging Market Economies
A critical challenge facing many emerging market
economies is to preserve and extend the improvements
in living standards achieved in recent decades. Priorities vary greatly, reflecting heterogeneity in cyclical
positions and in the main impediments or risks to
attaining strong medium-term growth.
Navigating Cyclical Conditions
Cyclical conditions are even more diverse in
emerging market and developing economies than in
10A

review can be found in Banerji and others (2017).

Global Prospects and Policies

Figure 1.21. Emerging Market and Developing Economy Output
Gaps, 2017
(Percent of potential GDP)

Cyclical conditions are diverse in emerging market and developing economies.
2

1

0
PPP GDP-weighted average
–1

–2

–3

–4

BRA

EGY

IND

MEX

RUS

IDN

CHN

THA

TUR

IRN

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) country codes. PPP = purchasing power parity.

advanced economies, but output gaps are estimated to
be negative in most of the larger countries in the group
(Figure 1.21). The scope for easing fiscal policy to support economic activity is constrained, however, given
that most countries have limited fiscal buffers and need
to return their public finances to a sustainable footing.
In several cases, the limited fiscal space reflects the
incomplete withdrawal of the stimulus injected during
the global recession, or a continued loosening in fiscal
policy in recent years.
In Brazil, tackling the unsustainable expenditure
mandates, including through reform of the pension
system, is of first-order importance for restoring
stronger confidence and fostering sustained growth in
private investment. Should the economy recover faster
than expected, a more front-loaded fiscal adjustment
than envisaged in the budget would be warranted.
Mexico’s gradual fiscal consolidation strategy
remains appropriate, given the resilience of the
economy and the desirability of setting public debt
on a downward slope. Meanwhile, with its economy
emerging from recession after an adjustment period,
Argentina should accelerate its fiscal consolidation
in 2018.
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

29

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

In China, the composition of fiscal policy should
favor the rebalancing of the economy, and the augmented deficit should be gradually lowered to a
debt-stabilizing level. The pace of deficit reduction
planned in Russia would appropriately entail a steady
adjustment to lower oil prices, but should be built on
more permanent and better-targeted measures than
currently envisaged.
In Saudi Arabia, a gradual but sustained fiscal consolidation to eliminate the budget deficit over several
years would strike the right balance between safeguarding activity and preserving fiscal buffers.
As currencies have stabilized or gained against the
US dollar since the spring, inflation has continued to
decline in many emerging market economies, more
recently helped by the decline in oil prices. Disinflation has been more rapid than expected in some
countries, such as Brazil, India, and Russia, which
has allowed monetary policy easing in recent months.
Monetary policy will need to stay tight in countries
where inflation rates remain well above central bank
targets, such as in Argentina and Turkey. In China,
where monetary accommodation should be gradually
reduced, the monetary policy framework could be
made more effective by phasing out monetary targets,
resuming progress toward a more flexible exchange
rate, and improving communications.
Exchange rate flexibility has served many emerging
market and developing economies well in recent years.
It has helped support capital inflows where domestic
and external financial conditions have tightened, and
helped safeguard growth and limit the drawdown
of fiscal and reserve buffers following terms-of-trade
declines in commodity exporters. Wherever possible,
exchange rates should be used as the main buffer
against external shocks.
Strengthening financial resilience is an overarching priority for emerging market and developing
economies. In China, minimizing the risk of a sharp
economic slowdown will require intensification of the
authorities’ current efforts to tighten supervision, rein
in the expansion of credit, and tackle the underlying
stock of bad assets.
Many other emerging market and developing economies with open capital accounts need to be mindful
of a possible buildup of financial stability risks in an
environment of easy global monetary conditions, and
be aware of the risks from volatility as the US Federal
Reserve gradually withdraws stimulus. Net capital inflow
pressures for emerging market economies are likely
30

to persist so long as monetary policy settings remain
broadly accommodative and equilibrium real interest
rates remain low in advanced economies. Countries
receiving buoyant capital inflows may need to step up
efforts in financial sector supervision and regulation to
manage vulnerabilities, deter excessive borrowing, and
help ensure that financing flows to projects that contribute to raising aggregate productivity.
Where an important share of external borrowing is
undertaken directly by the corporate sector, curtailing
any tax preferences for debt (over equity finance) could
help keep the risk of overborrowing in check. Ensuring
efficient corporate insolvency and restructuring frameworks would also help achieve faster and less costly
resolution of problems should repayment difficulties
arise as global financing conditions gradually become
less accommodative.
Bolstering Medium-Term Potential Output and
Inclusiveness
Safeguarding and furthering past gains in per capita
incomes and living standards is imperative across
emerging market and developing economies in light of
the sizable development needs of most countries. Some
countries that are projected to maintain strong growth
rates in the baseline forecast will need to keep the main
downside risks in check (for instance, in China, where
it would be advisable to deemphasize near-term growth
targets and focus on reforms that would enhance
the sustainability of growth). Countries with modest
medium-term growth prospects will urgently need to
tackle the most binding structural impediments to
growth. Priorities vary, but, in many countries, include
improving the quality of infrastructure and education,
strengthening governance, enhancing the business
climate, and facilitating greater female labor market
participation, as well as a host of product and labor
market reforms and further trade integration.
•• Inclusiveness: As discussed in the Fiscal Monitor, emerging market and developing economies generally have
higher levels of inequality than advanced economies
but, in many cases, their lower administrative capacity
and limited fiscal space restrict the fiscal tools available
for redistribution. For countries with low administrative capacity and larger informal sectors, setting a
relatively high tax-exempt threshold for the personal
income tax and gradually decreasing it as administrative capacity improves would help increase compliance as well as progressivity over time. Reducing
opportunities for tax avoidance and evasion, especially

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

for high-income earners, is also important. Indirect
taxation (such as a value-added tax or a consumption
tax) has still the potential to be progressive, if revenues
are used to finance progressive spending and if complemented by excise taxes on luxury goods. Improving
access to quality education and health care for the
disadvantaged is also crucial for improving equity. In
education, efforts should be focused on eliminating
enrollment gaps in primary and secondary education,
especially for the disadvantaged, and expanding the
role of private financing and student loans for higher
education. In the area of health care, the priority is to
achieve universal health coverage with a broad package
of essential health services. Improving efficiency of
social spending is also crucial.
•• Infrastructure: In emerging market economies and
low-income countries, infrastructure provision per
capita is still a fraction of that in advanced economies. Inadequate infrastructure is widely judged a
key barrier to growth and development, especially
in Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa. Selecting
public infrastructure projects with diffused productivity gains and raising the efficiency of public
infrastructure spending are principal challenges for
many economies. In Brazil, ongoing efforts to make
the infrastructure concessions program more attractive to investors while improving the standards of
governance and program design would help alleviate
key supply-side bottlenecks and support near-term
demand. In Colombia, implementation of the
authorities’ infrastructure agenda would help reduce
a historical infrastructure gap, foster private investment, and help exporters access markets.
•• Institutions: Many emerging market and developing
economies have substantial scope to improve the climate for business and investment. Decisive actions
to enhance governance and the rule of law would
help rein in corruption, strengthening business
confidence and providing a boost to investment in
some countries (for example, Brazil, Mexico, Peru).
Strengthening institutions can also help reduce
country risk perceptions and act as a countervailing
force against a possible tightening of global financial
conditions. Many countries could simplify regulations and administrative procedures for starting a
business, increase the efficiency of the legal system,
and reduce regulatory uncertainty (for example,
Turkey, South Africa).
•• Unleashing greater labor supply: Labor force participation rates for women are much lower than

Global Prospects and Policies

those for men in emerging market and developing
economies (the average gap is close to 30 percentage
points for emerging market economies of the Group
of Twenty). Gender gaps in labor force participation not only hold back potential output, but also
limit women’s economic and social opportunities,
harming inclusiveness. Priority reforms include
eliminating legal barriers that prevent women from
working, improving infrastructure, and enhancing
gender equality in accessing social services, finance,
and education (for example, India).
•• Product and labor market regulations and trade
policies: Fostering greater competition in domestic product and service markets, simplifying labor
market regulations, and removing barriers to trade
are also important broad reform areas for many
economies, and involve a varied set of priorities. In
South Africa, for example, further progress is needed
to facilitate entry by new firms into power generation, transportation, and telecommunications, which
would reduce the cost of key business inputs and
thereby foster growth and job creation. The recent
agreement to introduce a national minimum wage,
combined with a code of good practice for collective
bargaining, has the potential to raise living standards
for those below the poverty line. At the same time,
its employment impact will need to be carefully
monitored, with the government standing ready to
introduce complementary measures for vulnerable
sectors, such as small and medium-sized enterprises. Further labor market reforms are advisable to
ensure that wages are determined by firm-specific
conditions. In India, simplifying and easing labor
market regulations and land acquisition procedures
are long-standing requirements for improving the
business climate. Expanding the role of market
forces in the economy is a priority in China and will
entail removing barriers to entry in the highly closed
services sector and allowing state-owned enterprises
to face harder budget constraints. Productivity
could be fostered by reducing tariff and nontariff
barriers to international trade (for instance, Brazil,
China, and India).

Policies—Low-Income Developing Countries
As with the broader group of emerging market
and developing economies, low-income developing
countries dependent on commodity exports continue
to face weaker economic prospects than those countries
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

31

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 1.22. Per Capita Real GDP Growth across Low-Income
Developing Countries
(Percent)

Low-income developing economies dependent on commodity exports continue to
face weaker economic prospects than those with more diversiﬁed export bases.
6

4

2

0

–2

1995–2005
2006–16
2017–22

–4

–6

Diversiﬁed exporters

Oil exporters

Non-oil commodity
exporters

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Bars denote PPP GDP weighted averages; red markers indicate the medians;
and black markers denote the top and bottom deciles of per capita GDP growth in
the country groups. Country groups are deﬁned in IMF (2015).

with more diversified export bases (Figure 1.22).11
With policy adjustments to lower oil revenues
delayed, fiscal deficits in some commodity-exporting
low-income countries remain large, external positions are weaker, and financial sector vulnerabilities
are emerging. Although GDP is set to grow in most
commodity-exporting low-income countries in 2017,
fuel exporters are projected to do worse than nonfuel
commodity exporters. By contrast, countries with
more diversified export bases have recorded relatively
strong growth, which is expected to continue at a
rapid clip, in part, with the benefit of lower oil bills.
Robust growth, however, has not always translated into
improved fiscal and external current account positions,
reflecting limited progress in adopting countercyclical
policies and higher public sector spending.
Total public debt and debt service have therefore
risen sharply across low-income developing countries,
with about one-third at “high” risk of external debt
11Classifications of low-income countries according to commodity
dependence can be found in IMF (2015).

32

distress or already in debt distress, and one-third
at “moderate” risk.12 Many low-income developing
countries continue to experience conflict and security disruptions (Afghanistan, Chad, Somalia, South
Sudan, Yemen, a few parts of Nigeria), whereas parts
of sub-Saharan Africa face food insecurity related to
droughts (The Gambia, South Sudan, Somalia).
With divergent prospects, policy priorities continue
to differ across low-income developing countries.
•• Prospects for commodity exporters are heavily influenced by the process of adjustment to lower commodity prices. The adjustment needs to continue
and, in some cases, accelerate, based on comprehensive and internally consistent sets of policies. Fiscal
policy needs to be better calibrated to contain debt
accumulation while protecting outlays key to growth
prospects, such as priority capital expenditures and
social spending. In many countries, improvements
in domestic revenue mobilization and continued
rationalization of spending needs, along with
concessional financing, are necessary to underpin
successful adjustment processes. Allowing greater
exchange rate flexibility—where an option—could
act as a shock absorber and facilitate adjustment,
supported by monetary policy settings to contain
the inflation pressures that may result from currency depreciations. Financial stability needs to be
maintained through enhanced financial sector regulation and supervision and by addressing emerging
financial sector vulnerabilities, including increased
domestic arrears and NPLs. Countries in or at high
risk of debt distress need to accelerate the adjustment and limit nonconcessional external borrowing.
•• Policy priorities for diversified low-income developing countries vary. However, an overarching goal for
these economies should be to strike a better balance
between spending for development and social needs
and improving public debt sustainability by rebuilding fiscal positions and foreign reserves holdings
while growth is strong.
Across all low-income countries, better debt management would also help those exposed to global financial
markets cope with volatility in capital inflows, balance
sheet currency exposures, and the prospect of monetary
policy normalization in the United States. Over the
long term, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Develop12Based on the Debt Sustainability Framework for Low-Income
Countries, as described in IMF (2013b).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

ment identifies a broad range of issues that will require
action to deliver durable and inclusive growth. Within
this framework, generating sustainable and resilient
growth will require steps to promote diversification and
structural transformation and bridge infrastructure gaps.
In particular, efforts to boost domestic revenue mobilization, strengthen debt management, and ensure that
public spending is efficient and well targeted would contribute to scaling up infrastructure investment without
endangering public debt sustainability. To make growth
more inclusive and resilient, policies should be oriented
toward creating jobs and encouraging gender equality,
promoting environmental sustainability, boosting access
to financial services, and strengthening the redistributive
role of fiscal policy to protect the most vulnerable.

Multilateral Policies
Strong, sustainable, balanced, and inclusive growth
requires a well-functioning, cooperative, multilateral framework for international economic relations.
Because national policies create spillovers across
countries, all countries are better served when policymakers engage in regular dialogue and work within
agreed mechanisms to resolve disagreements. At the
same time, the international community continuously
needs to adapt the multilateral system to the changing
global economy. Active dialogue and cooperation will
help improve and modernize rules while addressing
individual countries’ valid concerns. This process will
ensure continued mutual benefits and evenhandedness and, together with strong domestic policies, help
avoid a broad withdrawal from multilateralism, either
through widespread protectionism or competitive races
to the bottom in taxation and financial and regulatory oversight. Multilateral cooperation is also vital
for addressing important longer-term challenges in
the global economy, including providing support to
low-income countries for meeting development goals
and mitigating and adapting to climate change.
Maintaining Rules-Based, Open Multilateral Trade
with Broadly Shared Gains
Cross-border economic integration through trade
openness has been a critical source of productivity
growth and resilience over the past several decades
for countries at all income levels.13 Hundreds of mil13A body of research has documented that economic integration
together with technological progress has increased the efficient use

Global Prospects and Policies

lions were lifted out of poverty in emerging market
and developing economies during a period of rapid
cross-border integration, helping reduce global income
inequality. However, global trade has slowed dramatically in recent years, mostly reflecting weakness in
aggregate demand, but also the slower pace of new
trade reforms and an uptick in protectionist measures.
And trade rules have not kept pace with the evolving
global economy; for example, integrated global production structures require more coherent rules across
several policy areas, such as goods trade, services trade,
investment policy, and intellectual property.
Rolling back temporary barriers to trade introduced
since the global financial crisis and reducing trade
costs would support the nascent recovery in trade,
reigniting an important driver of global productivity
growth. To that end, pressing ahead with an ambitious
trade agenda is crucial. A global trading system—with
strong, well-enforced rules that continue to adjust
to promote competition and a level playing field—
remains critical (IMF, World Bank, and WTO 2017).
Addressing tariff barriers in sectors where they remain
high, such as agriculture, and implementing commitments under the Trade Facilitation Agreement, which
came into effect in February 2017, can significantly
reduce trade costs in traditional areas. Advancing trade
reforms in services and in other areas, such as digital
trade, and improving cooperation in investment policies can make positive contributions to cross-border
trade flows and global growth; although progress is
best made at the global level, ambitious, broad-based
regional agreements that address these “frontier” areas
of trade policy can also be helpful. As discussed in
Chapter 1 of the April 2017 WEO, open trade policies
should be complemented by comprehensive policy
approaches at national levels to reduce adjustment
pains and provide opportunities for all.
Cooperation for Maintaining Global
Financial Stability
Maintaining robust national financial regulatory
regimes, including in countries and regions with
systemic financial systems, such as China, Europe,
and the United States, and recapitalizing institutions
and cleaning up balance sheets where necessary produces positive spillovers for global financial stability.
of global resources, boosted incomes, and expanded access to goods
and services. For a recent summary, see Baldwin (2016). See also
Wacziarg and Welch (2008); Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2013);
and Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

33

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

In addition, there is an urgent need to finalize the
international financial regulatory reform agenda by
tackling outstanding challenges, such as the regulation
and oversight of financial institutions, including nonbanks; ensuring regulators can resolve globally systemic
financial institutions effectively; and strengthening the
resilience of central counterparty clearing for derivatives. Coordinated and collective action is needed to
manage risks to financial stability from cyberattacks,
money laundering, and terrorism financing. Closer
cross-border regulatory cooperation is also needed to
address the pressures that several countries have experienced in correspondent banking relationships, which
play a key role in facilitating global trade, remittances,
and economic activity. As shown in Box 1.5, remittances have grown in global importance and are a key
mechanism for sustaining consumption in the face of
income shocks.
Last, the high degree of international financial
interconnectedness and vulnerability in some regions
calls for a closely coordinated and adequately resourced
global financial safety net as well as stronger frameworks for the prevention and resolution of debt crises.
Cooperation on International Taxation Issues
As increased capital mobility across borders has
fueled international tax competition, governments have
found it more challenging to finance their budgets
without increasing taxes on labor income or imposing
regressive consumption taxes. International corporate
income tax evasion and avoidance through, for example, profit shifting to lower tax jurisdictions, could
further erode popular support for international trade

34

and investment integration. Policymakers can make
more meaningful progress toward equitable tax systems
(that prevent an increasing share of after-tax income
from accruing to owners of capital) if their national
efforts to safeguard revenues are backed by multilateral
cooperation.
Noneconomic Challenges
Multilateral cooperation is also indispensable for
addressing important medium-term global challenges,
such as meeting the 2030 Sustainable Development
Goals, and providing financial support to vulnerable
economies and fragile states that face the greatest
development needs and, in many cases, deep economic and security challenges. The international
community will have a key role to play in fostering
and coordinating financial and other types of support
for countries most vulnerable to climate change. As
discussed in Chapter 3, increases in temperature have
vastly unequal effects across the world, with the brunt
of adverse consequences borne by those who can least
afford it and those who have contributed the least
to the rising threat of climate change. Low-income
countries will likely suffer disproportionately from
further global warming, which is expected to trigger
more severe droughts, storms, and epidemics. Coupled
with rising sea levels, these effects could feed social
unrest and refugee flows, with important cross-border
implications. A concerted multilateral effort to help
vulnerable economies cope with the consequences
of climate change and stem the man-made causes of
global warming is amply justified from both equity
and efficiency perspectives.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Scenario Box 1. Impact of Recommended Policies in the Group of Twenty Economies
The IMF’s G20 Model (G20MOD) is used here
to estimate the global impact of implementing the
IMF’s Article IV monetary and fiscal policy advice
to the Group of Twenty (G20) countries that is in
addition to what is assumed in the World Economic
Outlook (WEO) baseline.1 A qualitative indicator of
the recommended policy measures relative the WEO
baseline is presented in Scenario Table 1. Less than
half of G20 advanced and emerging market economies
ease policy. For advanced economies, fiscal policy is
eased in Germany, Japan, and Korea, and monetary
policy accommodates that easing. In emerging market
economies, fiscal policy is eased in the near term in
Saudi Arabia, while additional monetary stimulus is
provided in Mexico and Russia. Many remaining G20
countries tighten policy. Fiscal policy is tightened in
France, Italy, Spain, the United States, Argentina,
Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, and Turkey. Monetary
policy is also tightened in China and Turkey. Several
G20 countries—Australia, Canada, South Africa, and
the United Kingdom—along with non-G20 countries
have no discretionary changes in monetary or fiscal
policy stances relative to the WEO baseline. However,
recommendations for many G20 countries include
budget-neutral increases in infrastructure spending
that on balance act to stimulate activity owing to the
resulting positive impact on productivity and thus
private investment and real incomes.
The net impact over the WEO horizon is to raise
global GDP (Scenario Figure 1). GDP is higher in all
groups of countries except emerging market economies
that are tightening policy. The positive spillovers from
easing countries more than offset the own impacts
in advanced economies that are tightening policy.
However, the magnitude of the dampening impact of
tighter policy in emerging market economies is too
large to be offset by the policy easing elsewhere and
largely reflects the relative importance of China and
the magnitude of the policy tightening there.2
The mix of recommended policies has several benefits at the global level. The policy stimulus in countries
with fiscal space strengthens external demand for those
countries needing fiscal consolidations. This buffers the
1The

quantification of the fiscal and monetary policy advice is
based on IMF (2017d).
2Part of the tightening in fiscal policy in China is related to
restructuring of state-owned enterprises to facilitate product market reforms, the benefits of which accrue over the medium term
and are not included here, but can be found in IMF (2017d).

Scenario Figure 1. Group of Twenty Macro
Scenario
(Percent difference from baseline)
Real GDP
2. Countries with
No Policy
Change

1.0 1. Global
0.5

0.5
0.0

0.0
–0.5
2016

1.0

18

20

1.5 3. AEs with Policy
Easing
1.0

22 2016

18

20

4. AEs with Policy
Tightening

–0.5
22
1.5
1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

–0.5
2016

18

20

1.5 5. EMs with
Policy Easing
1.0

22 2016

18

20

–0.5
22

6. EMs with Policy 1.5
Tightening
1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

–0.5

–0.5

–1.0
2016

18

20

22 2016

18

20

–1.0
22

Current Account/GDP
1.0 7. Advanced
Surplus
0.5
Countries

8. Advanced
Deﬁcit
Countries

1.0
0.5

0.0

0.0

–0.5

–0.5

–1.0
2016

18

20

1.0 9. Emerging
Surplus
Countries
0.5

22 2016

18

20

10. Emerging
Deﬁcit
Countries

0.0
–0.5
2016

–1.0
22
1.0
0.5
0.0

18

20

22 2016

18

20

–0.5
22

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: AEs = advanced economies. EMs = Emerging market
economies.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

35

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Scenario Box 1 (continued)
Scenario Table 1. Assumed Policy Actions
Relative to the WEO Baseline
Color Key:

Ease substantially
Ease moderately
Accommodate
Tighten moderately
Tighten substantially
No change
Fiscal1

Monetary

Near term

Long term

Advanced Economies Easing Policy
Germany
Japan
Korea
Advanced Economies Tightening Policy
France
Italy
Spain
United States

near-term negative impact on activity while increasing
overall global fiscal sustainability. In the medium term,
lower global public debt reduces global real interest
rates, leading to permanently higher private investment and potential output. External imbalances also
improve, but not everywhere. For advanced economies
where external imbalances have recently widened,
these policy measures yield an improvement, with
current accounts falling in surplus countries and rising
in deficit countries. For emerging market economies,
however, external imbalances rise modestly. In large
part, this reflects the scale of adjustment in China and
its impact on domestic demand and thus imports.3 In
addition to these quantifiable macroeconomic benefits,
the recommended policy measures also help to reduce
risks to the outlook, lowering the probability of sharp
adjustments down the road and raising medium-term
sustainable growth.

Emerging Market Economies Easing Policy
Mexico
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Emerging Market Economies Tightening Policy
Argentina
Brazil
China
India
Indonesia
Turkey
No Policy Changes
Australia
Canada
South Africa
United Kingdom
Other euro area
Non-Group of Twenty
Source: IMF staff compilation.
1Defined as the difference between the projected and recommended
level of the cyclically adjusted primary balance.

36

3It is worth noting that IMF Article IV policy advice also
includes structural and other reform measures that are not
included here and those measures, particularly for China, will
help to reduce external imbalances.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Box 1.1. Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies

Age Groups
For the adult population of advanced economies
as a whole, labor force participation rates declined by
0.8 percentage point since 2007.2 Participation rates
declined for the young (age 15–24—the group with
the largest cross-country dispersion in participation
rates), in part because more people stay in school for
Prepared by Zsóka Kóczán, with research assistance
from Ava Hong.
1Unless stated otherwise, the figures for advanced economies
in this box refer to the combined workforces and working-age
populations of 31 advanced economies, which account for about
95 percent of the total population of countries classified as
advanced economies in the World Economic Outlook (WEO).
2The total labor force participation rate can be written as the
population-share weighted average of the participation rates of
different age groups:
p​ op​ ti​  ​
i ____
​​LFPR​ t​​  = ​∑ i4= ​​ ​LFPR​ 
1​
t​  ​ ​  ​pop​ t ​​​​ .

Here, i refers to the following age groups: 15–24, 25–54, 55–64,
65+. Results are robust to using a finer breakdown of age groups
into five- or 10-year intervals.

Figure 1.1.1. Population Shares by Age
Group and Gender
Total
70
60

Female

Male

1. Population Shares
(Percent)

50
40
30
20

15–24
4
3

25–54

55–64

2016

2007

2000

2016

2007

2000

2016

2007

2000

2016

0

2007

10
2000

In advanced economies, fewer people in the adult
population (those 15 and older) have been working or
actively looking for work since the turn of the century.1 This mild downturn in the labor force participation rate began around 2000, appears to have picked
up since 2007, and is generally projected to continue
and eventually gather pace as populations age.
Population aging generally puts downward pressure
on the overall participation rate. In advanced economies, the population shares of young (age 15–24) and
prime-age workers (age 25–54) have been declining,
while those of the 54–64 and 65+ age groups have
been rising (Figure 1.1.1). Given that the 54–64 and
especially the 65+ age groups have lower participation
rates than the prime-age group, these shifts tend to
lower the overall participation rate.
But beneath the headline figures, the variations in
how participation rates within various age and gender
groups have changed are striking, with remarkable
gains in the participation rates of women in some
countries. If such gains continue and broaden, the
demographic transition may not immediately translate
into a slowdown in the growth of the labor force. This
heterogeneity (as well as some evidence of convergence
in participation rates) also suggests that there is scope
for policies to postpone the adverse effects of the demographic transition on the growth rate of the workforce.

65+

2. Changes in Population Shares, 2007–16
(Percentage points)

2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4

15–24

25–54

55–64

65+

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows population-weighted averages across
31 advanced economies.

longer.3 For the 25–54 age group, where participation
remains the highest, rates have been mostly flat in
total, though with starkly divergent paths for men and
women, with men’s participation rate declining and
women’s increasing. Participation rates of both men
and women in the 55–64 age group showed a sharp
rise, and the 65+ participation rates also rose for both
genders, especially after 2007 (Figure 1.1.2).4
3As discussed, for instance, by Balleer, Gómez-Salvador, and
Turunen (2009); Aaronson and others (2014); Council of Economic Advisors (2014); Canon, Kudlyak, and Liu (2015); and
Dvorkin and Shell (2015).
4Declining participation rates of the young and prime-age
men are highlighted by Balleer, Gómez-Salvador, and Turunen

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

37

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 1.1 (continued)
Figure 1.1.3. Decomposition of Change in
Labor Force Participation Rate, 2007–16

Figure 1.1.2. Labor Force Participation
Rates by Age Group and Gender
Total

8

4

Age 15–24
Age 25–54

3

1. Labor Force Participation Rates
(Percent)

Age 55–64
Age 65+

Total

2
1
0
–1

Total
10

Male

2000
07
16
2000
07
16
2000
07
16
2000
07
16
2000
07
16

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Female

15–24

25–54

55–64

65+

2. Changes in Labor Force Participation Rates,
2007–16 (Percentage points)

6

–2
–3
–4

Total

Within

Between

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Total population across 31 economies normalized to 1.
Within and between changes are based on, respectively,
population and labor force participation rates held constant at
2007 levels. Between changes include the small interaction
effect.

4
2
0
–2
–4

Total

15–24

25–54

55–64

65+

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows population-weighted averages across
31 advanced economies.

participation rates into changes in participation rates
within each age group while holding their population
shares fixed (“within changes”), a shift in the relative
sizes of age groups while holding participation rates
fixed (“between changes”), and an interaction term:
​​∆ LFPR​ t​​  = ​∑ i4= ​​​​1​(​​  ∆ ​LFPR​ ti​  ​ ​PS​ 0i ​ ​ 

Shifting population shares have tended to push
overall participation rates down, while rising participation rates within some age groups have tended to
increase them. This effect can be documented using
a shift-share decomposition, as illustrated in Figure 1.1.3. The figure decomposes changes in overall
(2009), Dvorkin and Shell (2015), Council of Economic
Advisors (2016), and Krause and Sawhill (2017). In European
economies, this stands in contrast with rising female labor
force participation, which has been declining in the United
States (for example, Krause and Sawhill 2017). Balleer and
others (2009) examine the drivers of the increase in labor force
participation rates during the precrisis period in the euro area
and predict a fall in participation rates over the following years
based on an age and cohort analysis.

38

+ ​LFPR​ 0i ​ ​ ​∆ PS​ ti​  ​ − ∆ ​LFPR​ ti​  ​ ​∆ PS​ ti​  ​​)​​​​
​pop​  i​  ​

t
where ​​PS​ ti​  ​  = ​ ____
​popt​   ​​​​ is the population share and t = 0
refers to year 2007, the initial year. The contribution
of the interaction term (combining changes in participation rates and changes in group sizes) is typically
very small and is included in the “between change” in
Figure 1.1.3.
This decomposition suggests that the decline in
overall participation rates was driven by aging—
captured by “between changes”—while “within
changes” would have acted to increase participation
rates: the contribution of the decline in the participation rates of the young is more than offset by
the increase in participation rates of the age 25 and

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Box 1.1 (continued)
older groups.5 This finding reflects a continuation of
precrisis trends; at the same time, the drags from shifts
toward the older age groups and from the decline in
the participation rates of the young were more pronounced after 2007.
This broad pattern—aging weighing on participation rates, and rising participation of older workers
more than offsetting the falling rates of younger
workers—holds across most of the large European
economies. Their net effect is positive in Germany,
Italy, and the United Kingdom (Figure 1.1.4).6 In the
United States, the decline in the participation rate of
prime-age workers (ages 25–54) has compounded the
effects of aging. Because of the decline in the participation rate of US prime-age workers, the United States
makes a sizable contribution to the decline in the overall sample of advanced economies. In fact, the overall
labor force participation rate of the remaining 30
countries increased by 0.4 percentage point between
2007 and 2016.

Figure 1.1.4. Changes in Labor Force
Participation, Select Advanced Economies,
2007–16
(Percentage points)
25 1. Changes in Labor Force Participation Rates by
Age Group
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–15
–20

FRA

DEU

25–54
65+
ITA

JPN

ESP

GBR

USA

6 2. Decomposition of Changes in Labor Force
Participation Rates
4
Within
Between
Total

Gender

2

The 0.8 percentage point decline in participation
between 2007 and 2016 masks a striking divergence
between men and women: men’s participation rate
fell by 2.3 percentage points during this period,
while that of women increased 0.7 percentage point.
A shift-share decomposition similar to that shown
in Figure 1.1.3, but further splitting age groups
by gender, confirms such differences for the 25–54
age group in particular, where participation rates
of men have been falling but those of women have
been rising.7 This pattern became more pronounced
after the global financial crisis (Figure 1.1.5): in the
precrisis years male participation rates in this group
still increased in Germany and Italy (and showed
only a very small drop in France and the United
Kingdom), so that the overall contribution of the
25–54 age group to participation rates was positive,
while postcrisis the declining rates for men more

0

5This is in line with the findings of Aaronson and others
(2014), who examine the causes of the decline in participation
rates in the United States and highlight the role of structural
forces, such as aging.
6As expected, the effects of aging are most pronounced in
Japan. The increase in participation rates of the 55–64 group is
largest in continental Europe.
7Changes in the participation rates of other age groups
and the effects of aging act in the same direction for males
and females.

15–24
55–64
Total

–10

–2
–4

FRA

DEU

ITA

JPN

ESP

GBR

USA

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Within and between changes are based on,
respectively, population and labor force participation rates
held constant at 2007 levels. Between changes include the
small interaction effect. Labels in the ﬁgure use International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.

than offset the effects of rising rates for women.
The United States again stands out from other large
advanced economies, with declining participation
rates of prime-age women, and, to a greater extent, of
men.8 Over time, there has been some convergence
of participation rates, especially of female participa8Council of Economic Advisors (2016) documents the trend
of declining prime-age male labor force participation in the
United States over the past half century and examines a number
of potential explanations. The analysis suggests that reductions
in the demand for labor, especially for lower-skilled men, appear
to be an important component of the decline in prime-age male
labor force participation.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

39

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 1.1 (continued)
Figure 1.1.5. Changes in Labor Force
Participation Rates for the 25–54 Age Group
by Gender, Select Advanced Economies

Figure 1.1.6. Convergence in Female Labor
Force Participation Rates

(Percentage points)
Male
6

Change in female labor force participation rate,
2000–16 (percentage points)

14

Female

1. 2000–06

4
2
0
–2

6

FRA

DEU

ITA

JPN

ESP

GBR

USA

12

y = –0.18x + 13.04
R 2 = 0.21

ESP

10

AUT
8
6
4
2
0
–2

CYP

EST

NZL

DEU
GRC
ITA

ISR

IRL

BEL
FRA

LVA

CHE
NLD
AUS

SWE ISL

KOR LTU
GBR CAN

JPN
SVN

CZE

PRT
SVK
DNK FIN
NOR
USA

–4
30
40
50
60
70
80
Female labor force participation rate, 2000 (percent)

1. 2007–16

4
Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development.
Note: Labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) country codes.

2
0
–2

FRA

DEU

ITA

JPN

ESP

GBR

USA

Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development.
Note: Labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) country codes.

tion rates: countries where participation rates were
lower in 2000 tended to see larger increases, while
those with the highest rates saw smaller increases or
outright declines (Figure 1.1.6).9
9Blau and Kahn (2013) examine the drivers of this convergence and find that the expansion of family-friendly policies
(including parental leave and part-time work entitlements) in
other Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries can explain close to 30 percent of the relative
decrease in US women’s labor force participation. However, they
note that these policies also appear to encourage part-time work
and employment in lower-level positions: in the United States,
women are more likely than in other countries to have full-time
jobs and to work as managers or professionals.

40

Outlook and Policy Implications
Looking ahead, demographics are likely to continue to play a prominent role in determining the
path of the aggregate labor force participation rate.
Over the longer term, the downward influence of
aging on the aggregate labor force participation rate
is likely to dominate. This will restrain growth in the
“potential labor force” (affected by the size and age
composition of the working-age population and the
participation rates of the demographic groups) and
hence potential output, as noted in Chapter 3 of the
April 2015 WEO.
Policies to raise participation would help slow
the decline in the labor force growth rate, in turn
slowing the rise of the dependency ratio and thereby
supporting fiscal sustainability. Eliminating policies that discourage second earners in households,
ensuring the availability of affordable child care
and elderly care, fostering flexible work arrangements, and offering family-friendly benefits, such
as parental leave, would generally be beneficial.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Box 1.1 (continued)
However, given the divergent paths in participation
rates across the countries highlighted above, policy
priorities vary with country-specific circumstances.
In the United States, where both male and female
prime-age participation rates have been declining,

more targeted measures may be needed (see IMF
2017a). Immigration reform would also raise the size
of the labor force and boost participation rates and
could largely offset further declines in participation
caused by aging.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

41

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 1.2. Will the Revival in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets Be Sustained?
Capital flows to emerging markets slumped to a
multidecade low in 2015, prompting concerns that
outflow pressures could trigger a broader economic
downturn and lead to crises in those economies (see
Chapter 2 of the April 2016 World Economic Outlook).
A useful measure for illustrating the unusual downturn
is nonresident capital inflows, which are defined as the
net acquisition of emerging market assets by foreign
investors (also referred to as gross inflows). As a share
of emerging market GDP, nonresident inflows fell
to 1.6 percent in 2015, the lowest level since 1990
(Figure 1.2.1, panel 1). Another useful measure is net
capital flows, which is defined as nonresident inflows
less net outward investment by emerging market economy residents excluding official reserves accumulation.
Net capital flows turned negative in 2015 for the
first time in at least 35 years, reaching −1.0 percent
of emerging market GDP, and remained negative the
following year.
In recent quarters, however, capital inflows to
emerging markets have revived. Total nonresident
capital inflows to emerging markets are estimated to
have averaged $200 billion in the first two quarters of
2017, up from a quarterly average of $120 billion in
2015–16 (Figure 1.2.1, panel 2). Net capital flows have
also turned up in recent quarters, reaching $115 billion
in the first half of 2017. The sharp downturn and the
recent revival in both measures of capital flows can be
attributed to two main developments—the evolution
of China’s financial account and a rollercoaster ride in
portfolio flows to emerging markets.

Stabilization of External Pressures in China
China experienced a sharp decline in nonresident
capital inflows between the third quarter of 2015 and
the first quarter of 2016. During this period, concerns
about the possibility of a sharp depreciation of the
Chinese renminbi prompted the repayment of dollar
debt by Chinese firms. In addition, foreign investors
sought to reduce their exposures to renminbi assets,
especially offshore bank deposits. Because those funds
had been on-lent by Chinese banks’ foreign affiliates to
banks domiciled on the mainland, the mainland banks
had to repay those loans, thus further reducing total
external debt (see McCaulay and Shu 2016). External
pressures prompted large reserves interventions by the
The author of this box is Robin Koepke, with research assistance from Gavin Asdorian.

42

Figure 1.2.1. Capital Flows to Emerging
Market and Developing Economies
12 1. EMDEs Capital Flows
(Percent of GDP)
10
Nonresident
8
inﬂows
Net ﬂows
6
4
2
0

US recessions

–2
1990

94

98

2002

06

10

14 16

2. Nonresident Capital Inﬂows to EMDEs
(Billions of US dollars)
China
500
Em. Asia excluding China
Lat. Am.
400
Em. Eur.
Afr. and ME
300
Total
200
600

100
0
–100

2010

11

12

13

14

15

16 17:
Q1

Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: Afr. and ME = Africa and the Middle East; Em. Asia =
emerging Asia; Em. Eur. = emerging Europe; EMDEs =
emerging market and developing economies; Lat. Am. =
Latin America.

central bank, which kept renminbi depreciation in
check (Figure 1.2.2, panel 1).
Initially, the capital flows reversal was driven primarily by a reduction in Chinese liabilities to the rest of the
world, while resident outward investment continued to
grow broadly in line with previous trends (Figure 1.2.2,
panel 2). Nonresident inflows recovered in the second
quarter of 2016, but at that point domestic investors
began to move more and more money out of the country by acquiring foreign assets. Since the beginning of
2017, resident outflow pressures have abated following tighter enforcement of capital flow management
measures, weakening in the US dollar, and a pickup in
growth momentum. Net capital outflows (including

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Box 1.2 (continued)
Figure 1.2.3. Latest Capital Flows Trends
and Prospects

Figure 1.2.2. China: Reserves and Capital
Flows
250 1. China: Accumulation of Ofﬁcial Reserves
(Billions of US dollars)
200
150
100
50
0
–50
–100
–150
–200
2000 02

04

06

08

10

12

14

17:
Q2

300 2. China: Breakdown of Quarterly Capital Flows
(Billions of US dollars)
Nonresident inﬂows
200
Resident outﬂows
100

160 1. Nonresident Portfolio Flows to EMDEs
(Billions of US dollars; three-month rolling sum)
140
120
100
Portfolio debt
80
Portfolio equity
60
40
20
0
–20
–40
Taper
RMB
–60
tantrum
shock US election
–80
2013
14
15
16
Aug.
17
12 2. EMDEs Capital Flows and GDP Growth
Nonresident inﬂows
10
(percent of GDP)
EMDEs growth
8
(percent)

0

6

–100

4

–200
–300

2

Net errors and omissions
Total
2012

13

14

15

16

17:
Q1

Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates.

errors and omissions) eased to about $20 billion in the
second quarter of 2017 (from a peak of $210 billion in
the third quarter of 2016), which also marked the first
quarter of central bank reserves accumulation in China
since the second quarter of 2015.

A Rollercoaster Ride in Emerging Market
Portfolio Flows
The second development behind the recent slump
and revival of capital flows to emerging markets was a
rollercoaster ride in portfolio inflows that began with
the taper tantrum in mid-2013 (Figure 1.2.3, panel 1).
During that episode, investors reacted strongly to
signals from the US Federal Reserve that it would start
tapering purchases of bonds sooner than previously
expected. Rising US market interest rates weighed on
emerging market asset prices as foreign investors began
to pare their emerging market exposures.

US recessions
0
2000 02 04 06

08

10

12

14

16

18

Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: EMDEs = emerging market and developing
economies; RMB = renminbi.

In mid-2015, portfolio equity and debt inflows
again came under significant pressure when concerns
about possible renminbi devaluation intensified. From
the third quarter of 2015 to the first quarter of 2016
global investors sold a net $52 billion in emerging
market stocks and bonds, exceeding outflows of an
estimated $32 billion during the taper tantrum. The
episode was a stark illustration of China’s growing
importance for global financial markets and the world
economy, and for other emerging market economies
in particular.
After a modest recovery in 2016, portfolio flows
were hit by renewed repricing of US bonds after the
US election in November 2016. This time, the jump
in US bond yields was driven by expectations of fiscal
expansion and deregulation that would support growth
and prompt faster monetary tightening. Similar to
the taper tantrum episode, investors responded by

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

43

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 1.2 (continued)
curtailing their emerging market positions, reflected in
a reversal, albeit short-lived, of portfolio flows.
Starting in early 2017, portfolio flows to emerging
markets recovered as investor sentiment about the global
economy improved and financial conditions eased.
Against the backdrop of a rally in global stock markets,
foreign purchases of emerging market stocks and bonds
rose to an estimated $205 billion year-to-date through
August, more than twice the total for 2015–16.

Other Factors
Aside from these two explanatory factors, a number
of other developments have shaped capital flow
dynamics in recent years. An important idiosyncratic
shock was Russia’s sharp reversal of nonresident capital
inflows beginning in 2014, when its conflict with
Ukraine escalated. Since then, annual nonresident
inflows to Russia have averaged $120 billion (0.4 percent of emerging market GDP) less than in 2011–13.
A mitigating factor for the slowdown in net capital flows to emerging market economies in 2015–16
was reduced resident outward investment from most
emerging market economies (with the notable exception
of China). Resident investment abroad by emerging
market economies excluding China averaged $171 billion less annually in 2015–16 than in the three previous
years, reflected in reduced outward direct investment
($72 billion), portfolio investment ($51 billion), and
other investment ($48 billion). The decline in resident
outward investment itself seems to have been driven
primarily by reduced foreign inflows, reflecting the
two-way nature of capital flows. In particular, an influx
of foreign capital into local markets may, directly or
indirectly, provide funding for domestic investors to
acquire foreign assets. The fact that local investors in
emerging markets did not seek to take more money
abroad during this period may also indicate, with the
benefit of hindsight, that rapid asset sales by foreign
investors were exaggerated relative to changes in fundamentals of emerging market economies.

44

Capital Flows Outlook
Looking ahead, capital flows are expected to continue
to recover at a moderate pace. Nonresident inflows to
emerging market economies are projected at 3 percent of GDP in 2017, up from 2.6 percent in 2016
(Figure 1.2.3, panel 2). A robust economic outlook
should help emerging market economies attract solid
inflows, with aggregate real GDP growth projected to
rise to 4.6 percent and 4.9 percent in 2017 and 2018,
respectively, from 4.3 percent in 2015 and 2016.1
Strong growth should benefit all components of capital
flows, but would be expected to boost inflows of foreign
direct investment particularly, given that such inflows
are relatively more dependent on domestic factors (see
Koepke 2015 for a literature survey).
However, the external environment could turn less
favorable in the coming years, given the prospect of
monetary policy normalization in the major advanced
economies. Rising interest rates and a gradual unwinding of central bank asset purchases under the baseline
forecast are likely to exert some drag on portfolio flows
and bank-related inflows to emerging markets. Debt
flows are generally most sensitive to changes in external interest rates, suggesting that foreign purchases of
emerging market bonds and cross-border bank lending
could see some retrenchment in the years ahead.
Moreover, downside risks to capital flows remain
significant. For example, the major central banks could
tighten monetary policy faster than currently expected,
which could cause risk appetite toward emerging
market assets to suffer a setback from the buoyant conditions that have prevailed during the past six months,
triggering sizable outflows from emerging markets
(see Chapter 1 of the October 2017 Global Financial
Stability Report).
1The analysis in Chapter 2 of the April 2016 World Economic
Outlook finds that slowing emerging market growth contributed to the deceleration in capital flows to emerging markets in
recent years.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Box 1.3. Emerging Market and Developing Economy Growth: Heterogeneity and Income Convergence
over the Forecast Horizon
Per capita real GDP growth in emerging market and developing economies is projected to pick
up from 3.2 percent in 2017 to 3.6 percent in
2019 and stay at about 3.7 percent in 2020–22
(Figure 1.3.1). The growth differential relative to
advanced economies, where real per capita growth
is projected to average 1.4 percent between 2017
and 2022, suggests some catching up between the
two groups. However, the headline growth figures
for emerging market and developing economies
are heavily influenced by the largest economies
in the group and conceal substantial differences

Figure 1.3.1. Per Capita Real GDP Growth
across Country Groups
(Percent)

across countries.1 Zooming in on countries’ growth
prospects reveals that they are not as favorable for
some economies in the group as the headline figures
would suggest.

Heterogeneity
In general, there are sizable differences in emerging market and developing economy growth rates
1Per capita real income for each group is calculated by summing real GDP at purchasing power parities and dividing by
total population for the group.

Figure 1.3.2. Per Capita Real GDP Growth,
Emerging Market and Developing Economies,
by Region

(Percent)
10
8
8

7
6

6

5

4

4
3

2

2
1

0

0
–2
–4
–6

–1

1995–2005
2006–16
2017–22
AEs

EMDEs

–2

1995–2005
2006–16
2017–22

–3
China

Fuel
Nonfuel
exporters exporters
excluding
China

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Bars denote PPP (purchasing power parity) GDP
weighted averages; red markers indicate the medians; and
black markers denote the top and bottom deciles of per
capita GDP growth in the country groups. The fuel and nonfuel
exporter subgroups are deﬁned in Table D of the Statistical
Appendix and cover EMDEs only. AEs = advanced economies;
EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies.

–4
–5

LAC

MENAP

EMDE EMDE
Asia
Europe
excluding
China

SSA

CIS

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Bars denote PPP (purchasing power parity) GDP
weighted averages; red markers indicate the medians;
and black markers denote the top and bottom deciles of
per capita GDP growth in the country groups. CIS =
Commonwealth of Independent States; EMDE = emerging
market and developing economies; LAC = Latin America
and the Caribbean; MENAP = Middle East, North Africa,
Afghanistan, and Pakistan; SSA = sub-Saharan Africa.

The author of this box is Francesco Grigoli.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

45

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 1.3 (continued)
Table 1.3.1. Correlates of Growth Projections,
EMDEs, 2017–221
Fuel Exporters
Sub-Saharan Africa
EMDE Asia
EMDE Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Commonwealth of Independent States
Small Countries2
Ln per Capita Real GDP in 2011 (PPP)
Per Capita Real GDP Growth (2012–16)
Real GDP Growth in Trading Partners (2017–22)
Constant

–1.977***
(0.398)
0.116
(0.522)
0.754
(0.595)
0.562
(0.433)
0.315
(0.459)
0.826*
(0.449)
–1.210***
(0.408)
0.132
(0.218)
0.376***
(0.089)
0.019
(0.178)
0.535
(2.260)

Observations
147
R2
0.495
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05,
* p < 0.1. EMDE = emerging market and developing economy; PPP =
purchasing power parity.
1 Dependent variable in the regression is projected growth in per
capita real GDP averaged over 2017–22. The sample of EMDEs
excludes Libya, Yemen, and Venezuela, whose forecasts are affected
by idiosyncratic factors.
2 Defined here as countries with a population of less than half a million.

across regions (Figure 1.3.2). Per capita growth in
Asian emerging market and developing economies is
significantly higher than in other regions. Likewise,
the emerging market economies of Europe, followed
by those in the Commonwealth of Independent
States, are generally experiencing stronger per capita
growth than those in sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle
East and North Africa, and Latin America and
the Caribbean. The fast pace of per capita income
growth in Asia is driven to an important extent by
China (as suggested by Figure 1.3.1) as well as India.
Differences in median growth rates across regions are
more modest.
An even starker difference in per capita growth
rates exists between fuel-exporting and fuel-importing
emerging market and developing economies. The

46

median growth rate for fuel exporters was lower than
that for fuel importers in 1995–2005 and especially in
2006–16, and is forecast to diverge further in 2017–22
(as shown by the red markers in Figure 1.3.1). Regression analysis of the average projected growth rates over
the 2017–22 period on a set of indicator variables
and controls confirms dependence on fuel exports
and population size as the most important factors
underlying the diversity in countries’ growth forecasts
(Table 1.3.1). Fuel exporters’ projected growth rates
are almost 2 percentage points lower, on average, over
the 2017–22 period, reflecting an ongoing adjustment
to persistently lower oil prices, which, in some cases,
involves reforms expected to deliver growth dividends
only in the medium and long term.2 The results also
indicate that small countries (defined here as those
with populations of less than half a million people) are
projected to experience 1¼ percentage points lower
growth, on average, than other countries, suggesting
the importance of such factors as diseconomies of
scale, lack of diversification, and vulnerability to natural disasters. Once dummy variables for fuel exporters
and small countries are included in the regressions, the
regional dummies are no longer significant.3
Even within the fuel-exporter and importer groups,
however, there is significant heterogeneity. Among fuel
importers, for example, China, India, Vietnam, and
Bangladesh have grown, on average, by almost 6 percent annually from 1995 to 2016; their growth rates
are projected to moderate slightly to 5.8 percent over
2017–22. For the median fuel importer, the annual
per capita growth rates are 2.4 percent and 2.8 percent, respectively, over those periods. Among exporters, Angola, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, and Turkmenistan
registered per capita growth rates, on average, of
about 6 percent during 1995–2016, while the median
fuel-exporter country grew by 1.7 percent a year over
the same period.
2Substituting a commodity-exporter dummy for the
fuel-exporter dummy returns insignificant results, suggesting that
nonfuel commodity exporters are projected to perform relatively
better than fuel exporters in per capita real GDP growth.
3The results are generally robust to including historical growth
calculated over different periods (as opposed to 2012–16 as in
the regression presented in Table 1.3.1), as well as to estimating
the regressions by weighted least squares. Running the same
regressions with October 2016 WEO data yields similar results
for the fuel-exporter dummy, albeit with a smaller coefficient.
Dropping large countries, such as China and India, does not
affect the results.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Box 1.3 (continued)
Figure 1.3.3. EMDEs’ per Capita Real GDP
Growth Differentials vis-à-vis Advanced
Economies: 1995–2016 versus 2017–22
(Percentage points)

Per capita real GDP growth differential 2017–22

15

10

5

Historical
divergence
and projected
convergence

Continuing
convergence

Figure 1.3.4. Distribution of EMDE per Capita
Real GDP Growth Differentials with Respect
to Advanced Economies

(Number of countries)

35 1. 1995–2016
Zero growth differential
30
with respect to AEs,
1995–2016
25
(1.5 percent)
20
15
10
5

0

–5

0
No
convergence

Historical
convergence
and current
divergence

–10
–15 –10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
Per capita real GDP growth differential 1995–2016

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The ﬁgure depicts countries’ per capita real GDP
growth rates averaged over 1995–2016 (x-axis) against their
projected growth rates averaged over 2017–22 (y-axis), in
both cases expressed as a deviation from the per capita real
GDP growth rate for advanced economies averaged over the
same period. EMDEs = emerging market and developing
economies.

Convergence toward Advanced Economy
Income Levels

≤–5 [–4,–3] [–2,–1] [0,1]
[2,3]
[4,5]
[–5,–4] [–3,–2] [–1,0]
[1,2]
[3,4]
≥5
Growth differential with respect to AEs
(percentage points)

45 2. 2017–22
Zero growth differential
40
with respect to AEs,
35
2017–22
30
(1.4 percent)
25
20
15
10
5
0

≤–5 [–4,–3] [–2,–1] [0,1]
[2,3]
[4,5]
[–5,–4] [–3,–2] [–1,0]
[1,2]
[3,4]
≥5
Growth differential with AEs
(percentage points)

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The ﬁgure depicts the number of countries with growth
rates (in deviation from the advanced economy growth rate
over the same period) in the intervals shown in the x-axis.
AEs = advanced economies; EMDE = emerging market and
developing economy.

Even though the aggregated figures suggest some
convergence toward advanced economy income levels
over the forecast horizon, the picture is less bright for
a sizable fraction of emerging market and developing
economies.4 Under current WEO projections, slightly
less than three-quarters of the economies in the group
are expected to experience per capita income growth
rates higher than those of advanced economies over
2017–22. The rest—43 economies representing about
14 percent of the emerging market and developing

economy population—are projected to lag further
behind advanced economies in terms of GDP per
capita (Figure 1.3.4).5
In general, emerging market and developing
economies with faster per capita income growth than

4For an analysis of emerging market and developing economies’ growth performance compared with that of advanced
economies over the past four decades, see Chapter 2 of the
April 2017 WEO.

5The existence of convergence groups or clubs has been widely
discussed and tested in the literature on income convergence
(Durlauf and Johnson 1995; Desdoigts 1999; Durlauf and Quah
1999; Canova 2004).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

47

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 1.3 (continued)
Figure 1.3.5. Distribution of EMDE per Capita
Real GDP Growth Differentials with Respect
to Advanced Economies, by Type of Export
Earnings and Region

Figure 1.3.6. Distribution of EMDE Population
by per Capita Real GDP Growth Rate

(Population shares)

(Number of countries)

25 1. 1995–2016
45 1. 2017–22, by Type of Export Earnings
40
35
30
25

Zero growth differential
with respect to AEs,
1995–2016
(1.4 percent)

Fuel
Nonfuel

20
15
10

20
15

5

Zero growth differential
with respect to AEs,
1995–2016
(1.5 percent)
India
China
Other EMDEs

10
5
0

0
≤–5 [–4,–3] [–2,–1] [0,1]
[2,3]
[4,5]
[–5,–4] [–3,–2] [–1,0]
[1,2]
[3,4]
≥5
Growth differential with respect to AEs
(percentage points)

≤-5
[-4,-3] [-2,-1] [0,1]
[2,3]
[4,5]
[-5,-4] [-3,-2] [-1,0]
[1,2]
[3,4]
≥5
Growth differential with respect to AEs
(percentage points)

45 2. 2017–22
45
40
35
30

2. 2017–22, by Region
Zero growth differential
with respect to AEs,
2017–22
(1.4 percent)

40
EMDE Eur.
SSA
CIS

15
10

LAC
MENAP
EMDE Asia

≤–5 [–4,–3] [–2,–1] [0,1]
[2,3]
[4,5]
[–5,–4] [–3,–2] [–1,0]
[1,2]
[3,4]
≥5
Growth differential with respect to AEs
(percentage points)

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The ﬁgure depicts the number of countries with
growth rates (in deviation from the advanced economy
growth rate over the same period) in the intervals shown
in the x-axis. AEs = advanced economies; CIS =
Commonwealth of Independent States; EMDE = emerging
market and developing economy; LAC = Latin America
and the Caribbean; MENAP = Middle East, North Africa,
and Pakistan; SSA = sub-Saharan Africa.

advanced economies over the past two decades are
projected to continue to grow faster, as shown by the
strong overlap between those countries that exhibited
convergence in 1995–2016 and those that are projected to converge over the forecast horizon (that is,
with most of the countries falling into the upper right

48

25
15
10

Zero growth differential
with respect to AEs,
2017–22
(1.4 percent)
India
China
Other EMDEs

5
0

5
0

30
20

25
20

35

≤–5 [–4,–3] [–2,–1] [0,1]
[2,3]
[4,5]
[–5,–4] [–3,–2] [–1,0]
[1,2]
[3,4]
≥5
Growth differential with respect to AEs
(percentage points)

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The ﬁgures depict the share of the total EMDE
population in countries with growth rates in the intervals
shown on the x-axis. AEs = advanced economies; EMDE =
emerging market and developing economy.

quadrant in Figure 1.3.3). Convergence is expected to
be led by fuel importers, especially those in emerging
market and developing Asia and sub-Saharan Africa
(Figure 1.3.5), and by countries with larger populations, that is, China and India (Figure 1.3.6). It is disappointing that almost 18 percent of emerging market
and developing economies failed to converge toward
advanced economy income levels in 1995–2016 and
are not projected to do so in the next five years; and
9 percent of countries were converging in 1995–2016,

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Box 1.3 (continued)
Figure 1.3.7. Projected per Capita Real GDP
Growth Rates and 2011 Real Income Levels,
AEs and EMDEs
15

Per capita real GDP growth 2017–22

but are projected to increasingly fall behind advanced
economy income levels over the projection period.
On the brighter side, about 19 percent of emerging
market and developing economies were not converging in 1995–2016, but are now projected to do so
(Figure 1.3.3).
Growth projections for emerging market and developing economies do not indicate income convergence
within the group. Per capita real GDP growth rates
among emerging market and developing economies in
2017–22 are not projected to be significantly higher
(at 5 percent significance level) in countries with
relatively low incomes (Figure 1.3.7).6 By contrast,
per capita real GDP growth forecasts for advanced
economies display a negative and significant relationship (at 5 percent significance level) with income levels
in 2011, indicating further income convergence within
the advanced economy group over the forecast horizon, despite more homogeneous income levels.
Finally, a country’s growth rate does not always foretell matching gains in income for the majority of the
population. In China and India, for example, where
real per capita GDP grew by 9.6 percent and 4.9 percent a year, respectively, in 1993–2007, the median
household income is estimated to have grown less—by
7.3 percent a year in China and only 1.5 percent a
year in India.7

AEs
EMDEs
10

y = –2.03x + 23.27, R 2 = 0.46
(0.38)

5

0

–5
y = –0.32x + 5.07, R 2 = 0.02
(0.18)
–10
6

7
8
9
10
11
2011 ln per capita real GDP (PPP)

12

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The blue and red lines are ﬁtted based on regressions
of projected growth rates (averaged over 2017–22) on real
per capita real GDP levels in 2011 (at purchasing power
parity) on AE and EMDE samples, respectively. The number
in parentheses in the regression equation is the standard
error of the estimated coefﬁcient on real per capita real GDP
levels in 2011. AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs =
emerging market and developing economies; PPP =
purchasing power parity.

6The lack of a significant correlation (at 5 percent significance
level) between levels of 2011 per capita real GDP and projected
growth rates holds even when countries growing more slowly
than advanced economies are excluded from the sample.
7Based on data from the World Panel Income Distribution
database of Lakner and Milanovic (2015).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

49

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 1.4. Macroeconomic Adjustment In Emerging Market Commodity Exporters
Commodity prices have fallen dramatically in
recent years, with food and metal products losing
about 20 percent in value since 2012–13, and oil
prices halving over the past three years (Figure 1.4.1).
Commodity prices have not rebounded in the past
three years to their peak levels, and medium-term forecasts suggest that they are unlikely to do so. This box
documents the significant macroeconomic adjustments
under way in many commodity-exporting emerging
market and developing economies in the wake of these
price shocks.
The analysis is based on a sample of 48 commodityexporting emerging market and developing economies,
about half of which are low-income countries. The
economies are grouped by their main commodity
exports (fuel, metals, or food) and exchange rate
regime during 2013–17.1
As shown in Figure 1.4.2, many
commodity-exporting emerging market and developing economies maintain either currency pegs—
predominantly relative to the US dollar, but in some
cases to currencies such as the euro—or flexible
exchange rate regimes. Nevertheless, almost half of
the commodity exporters with pegs in 2013 have
subsequently adjusted their exchange rate regimes
(“regime adjustment” in the figure), typically
moving to either a more flexible regime or devaluing the currency in response to a large commodity
terms-of-trade decline. A significant number of
fuel-exporting countries have abandoned pegs (Figure 1.4.2, panel 1). In general, terms-of-trade losses
were largest for countries with pegs to the US dollar
(Figure 1.4.3).

The authors of this box are JaeBin Ahn, Eugenio Cerutti, and
Ksenia Koloskova.
1As in Chapter 2 of the October 2015 World Economic
Outlook, a country is defined as a commodity exporter if it meets
the following two criteria: (1) commodities constituted at least
35 percent of the country’s total exports, on average, between
1962 and 2014; and (2) net commodity exports accounted for at
least 5 percent of its gross trade (exports plus imports), on average, between 1962 and 2014. From the sample of 52 countries,
which satisfy these criteria, Libya, Syria, Venezuela, and Yemen
are omitted due to data constraints. The classification by type of
main export is derived using World Bank World Development
Indicators data, based on the shares of different types of commodity exports in total merchandise exports for 1999–2015.

50

Figure 1.4.1. Commodity Prices

(Index; January 1, 2013 = 100)
120

100

80

60

Oil (APSP)
Food
Metal

40

20

2012

13

14

15

16

17

Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: APSP = average petroleum spot price.

External Adjustment
Countries with flexible exchange rates have seen
sizable nominal depreciations since 2013, which translated into real depreciations, making them the only
group whose real effective exchange rates adjusted to
the commodity-price shock (Figure 1.4.4). Countries
with currencies fixed to the US dollar, by contrast,
experienced appreciation in nominal and real effective
terms (with the nominal appreciation reflecting the
general strengthening of the US dollar vis-à-vis other
currencies). Exchange rates fixed to other currencies—
mostly the euro—saw a depreciation in nominal terms
vis-à-vis the dollar, which induced some real effective
exchange rate adjustment. Finally, the largest nominal
depreciations were observed among the economies that
adjusted their regimes but, in most cases, this nominal
depreciation did not translate into sizable depreciations in real effective terms because inflation increased
in tandem.2

2Analysis in this box does not consider parallel/black market
exchange rates.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Box 1.4 (continued)
Figure 1.4.2. Exchange Rate Regimes of
Commodity-Exporting Emerging Market and
Developing Economies
(Number of countries)

Figure 1.4.3. Commodity Terms of Trade

(Index; June 2012 = 100; PPP weighted)
115
110

10 1. Commodity Fuel Exporters

105

8

100
6

95

4

90

2

85

0

Fixed dollar
Fixed nondollar
Flexible
Regime adjustment

80
Fixed dollar

Fixed
nondollar

Flexible

Regime
adjustment

75
70

6 2. Commodity Metal Exporters

65

2010

11

12

13

14

15

16 Jun.
17

4
Source: Gruss 2014.
Note: PPP = purchasing power parity.
2

0

6

Fixed dollar

Fixed
nondollar

Flexible

Regime
adjustment

3. Commodity Food Exporters

4

2

0

Fixed dollar

Fixed
nondollar

Flexible

Regime
adjustment

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Regime adjustment covers ﬁxed exchange rate
regimes that devalued their parity or changed the exchange
rate regime toward more ﬂexibility during 2013–17.

In response to terms-of-trade shocks that directly
affect the external balance, net export volume could
adjust, partly offsetting the initial impacts of the
shocks. The change in real exchange rates in response
to the terms-of-trade shock facilitates this external adjustment through the expenditure-switching
channel. Such real effective exchange rate adjustment and the associated switch in expenditures are
expected to be more pronounced in countries with
a flexible exchange rate regime (Adler, Magud, and
Werner 2017; IMF 2017b). Panel 1 of Figure 1.4.5
confirms this notion and shows that, despite facing
bigger terms-of-trade shocks, countries with fixed
exchange rates experienced the smallest adjustment
in net exports, whereas those with flexible exchange
rate regimes saw strong net export adjustments, which
more than offset their terms-of-trade shocks. Export
volumes did not react much, on average, across the
different exchange rate regimes, likely reflecting the
insensitivity of commodity exports to the exchange
rate as well as these countries’ limited export diver-

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

51

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 1.4 (continued)
Figure 1.4.5. Net Export Adjustment, 2013 –16

Figure 1.4.4. Evolution of Exchange Rates

(Index; 2010 = 100; PPP weighted)
Fixed dollar
Flexible

Fixed nondollar
Regime adjustment

10 1. Net Export Adjustment, 2013–16
(Percent of GDP)
5
0

125 1. Real Effective Exchange Rate
120

–5

115

–10

110

–15

105

–20

100
95

–25
–30

90

11

12

13

14

15

16

17
Export volume expansion

85
80
2010

120 2. Nominal Effective Exchange Rate
110
100
90
80
70

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

120 3. US Dollar per National Currency
Import volume compression

110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
2010

11

12

13

14

15

16

Sources: IMF, Information Notice System; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: Yearly average for 2010 –16; as of June for 2017.
PPP = purchasing power parity.

52

17

Fixed

Flexible

Regime
adjustment

40 2. Export Response, 2013–16
(Percent of GDP)
30
20
10
0
–10
–20
–30

Fixed
Flexible
Regime
adjustment

–40
–40 –30 –20 –10 0
10 20
REER appreciation
(percent)

60
50
2010

Import volume compression
Export volume expansion
ToT income shock
Changes in trade balance

25 3. Import Response, 2013–16
(Percent of GDP)
20
15
10

30

40

Fixed
Flexible
Regime
adjustment

5
0
–5
–10
–15
–40 –30 –20 –10 0
10 20
REER appreciation
(percent)

30

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: REER = real effective exchange rate; ToT = terms of
trade.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

40

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Box 1.4 (continued)
sification (Figure 1.4.5, panel 2). The stark contrast
in the behavior of net exports stems mainly from the
extent of import contraction. In turn, this could be
attributed to expenditure-switching effects in flexible
regime countries (and lack thereof in fixed regime
countries) (Figure 1.4.5, panel 3) as well as the varying
extent to which countries used their fiscal buffers, as
discussed next.

Figure 1.4.6. Fiscal Indicators

(Percent of GDP; PPP weighted)
Fixed dollar
Flexible

15 1. Primary Net Lending or Borrowing
10
5

Fiscal and Macroeconomic Adjustments
In the aftermath of the shock, countries with fixed
exchange rates used their fiscal and external buffers
to a greater extent than did those with more flexible
exchange rates. As shown in Figure 1.4.6, countries
with currency pegs incurred large fiscal deficits in the
aftermath of the commodity price decline, which were
heavily financed with higher borrowing, decreasing
reserves, and/or other past savings (such as deposits
in sovereign wealth funds). Countries that have had a
regime adjustment also increased their borrowing—
but less than did countries that maintained pegs. They
have also relied much less on reserves, likely due to
their low initial levels (which may have contributed
to the regime change in many cases). Those countries
with flexible exchange rates managed to keep budgets
balanced throughout 2013–16 and avoided the depletion of reserves.
Assessing whether flexible exchange rates have
helped safeguard GDP growth is more challenging. Countries with pegs to the dollar had greater
terms-of-trade losses than the others to begin with
(Figure 1.4.3), so they would be expected to see
weaker growth if they were not utilizing buffers.
Zooming in on the subsample of fuel exporters (which
experienced terms of trade losses at the same time),
Figure 1.4.7, panel 1 shows that the decline in growth
rates were generally comparable across countries
with different types of exchange rate regimes (with
the exception of those with pegs to currencies other
than the US dollar, which is a small group). All in
all, countries with dollar pegs shored up their GDP
growth rate to keep it on par with growth in the
countries with flexible exchange rates despite experiencing larger terms-of-trade losses—but with a greater
reliance on buffers.

Fixed nondollar
Regime adjustment

0
–5
–10
–15
–20
2010

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

12

13

14

15

16

17

12

13

14

15

16

17

50 2. Government Debt
40
30
20
10
0
2010

11

60 3. Reserves
50
40
30
20
10
0
2010

11

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: PPP = purchasing power parity.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

53

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 1.4 (continued)
Figure 1.4.7. Change in per Capita GDP Growth
and Inﬂation in Fuel Exporters, Conditional on
CToT
(Percent; average 2014–16 versus average 2011–13)
8 1. Change in per Capita GDP Growth
6
4
2

Turning to inflation rates, countries that experienced
large depreciations/devaluations—those with flexible
exchange rates and those that have adjusted regimes—
saw, on average, a larger increase in consumer price
inflation because of exchange rate pass-through
(although the increase was relatively contained—
between 1 percent and 3 percent for most countries,
conditional on their commodity terms-of-trade shocks)
(Figure 1.4.7, panel 2).

0
–2
–4
–6

Fixed
dollar

Fixed
nondollar

Flexible

Regime
adjustment

Flexible

Regime
adjustment1

8 2. Change in CPI Inﬂation
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6

Fixed
dollar

Fixed
nondollar

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The horizontal line inside each box represents the
median; the upper and lower edges of each box show the top
and bottom quartiles; and the red markers denote the
maximum and minimum. CPI = consumer price index; CToT =
commodity terms of trade.
1Minimum value excludes outlier value for the Islamic
Republic of Iran (–16.3).

54

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Box 1.5. Remittances and Consumption Smoothing
The number of people living outside their country of birth increased by nearly 60 percent over
1990–2015 to about 250 million, or 3 percent of the
world’s population. Migrants typically maintain strong
ties with their home countries, remitting part of their
labor income earned in their destination country to
their families staying behind.
The recorded US dollar value of remittances to
emerging market and developing economies increased
fivefold during 1990–2015, nearly three times the
value of official development assistance. By 2015, 98
countries received remittance inflows greater than
1.5 percent of GDP, with nearly one-third receiving
inflows exceeding 10 percent of GDP (Figure 1.5.1).
While some significant “remittance corridors” are
entirely between emerging market and developing
economies, about 45 percent of remittances flow from
advanced economies to emerging market and developing economies. As such, remittances have the potential
to be an increasingly important mechanism for sharing
income risks on a global scale.
Although remittances play a positive long-term
role in economic and social development, this box
focuses on an arguably no-less-critical role—that of
mitigating cyclical risks to household consumption
The authors of this box are Kimberly Beaton, Luis Catão, and
Zsóka Kóczán.

stemming from major macroeconomic shocks that
often hit emerging market and developing economies, particularly the poorer ones.1,2 In principle,
deep integration into the global financial system
can smooth the effects of such idiosyncratic income
shocks on household consumption through borrowing and lending in capital markets.3 However,
poorer countries are known to face a host of fric1For instance, by promoting financial deepening, reducing poverty, and increasing fiscal resources—see Adams and Page (2005);
Jongwanich (2007); and Giuliano and Ruiz-Arranz (2009). While
other research has also pointed to possible negative effects of remittances on growth—for instance, associated with losses in external
competitiveness due to exchange rate appreciations brought about
by higher remittances, Rajan and Subramanian (2005) find that
such Dutch Disease effects often associated with foreign aid do not
appear to extend to private remittances.
2Ratha (2003); Hadzi-Vaskov (2006); Bugamelli and Paterno
(2009); Chami, Hakura, and Montiel (2009); Combes and
Ebeke (2011); De and others (2016); and Beaton and others
(2017) consider the importance of remittances as a risk-sharing
arrangement to smooth consumption in developing countries
generally. Beaton, Cevik, and Yousefi (2017) explicitly consider
the importance of remittances in smoothing consumption under
fiscal shocks. Few studies have focused on the role of remittances
in smoothing commodity price shocks.
3Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2009) define consumption
smoothing as delinking fluctuations in idiosyncratic consumption growth from fluctuations in income, to maintain a steady
pace of household consumption over time.

Figure 1.5.1. Net Remittances as a Share of Output, 2015
(Percent)

Less than –1
–1 to 0
0 to 5

5 to 10
More than 10
No data

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook database; World Bank, Migration and Remittances database; and IMF staff calculations.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

55

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 1.5 (continued)
Figure 1.5.2. Financial Integration
(Percent of GDP)
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

All

High
remittance

LICs

EMDEs

AEs

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: “High remittance” refers to those countries with
remittance inﬂows greater than the median of 1.5 percent of
GDP over 1990–2014. Financial integration refers to de facto
ﬁnancial integration measured by the sum of external assets
and liabilities (as a share of GDP) from the data set by Lane
and Milesi-Ferretti (2017) in 2014. AEs = advanced
economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing
economies; LICs = low-income countries.

tions that limit international financial integration
(Figure 1.5.2); these impediments can, in turn,
greatly constrict the effectiveness of the textbook
capital-market-based mechanism for smoothing consumption. The main questions addressed in this box,
therefore, is the extent to which remittances help
overcome this financial imperfection and whether
their effectiveness varies across types of shocks and
characteristics of sending and receiving countries.
A first stab at answering this question is to note that
remittances are the least volatile component of balance
of payments flows (Figure 1.5.3, panel 1). Their volatility is even lower than that of foreign direct investment flows, which are well known to be less volatile
than equity and portfolio financial flows. Remittances
are also significantly less positively correlated with
GDP than foreign portfolio investment and foreign

56

direct investment flows.4 The stabilizing role of remittances also stands out when comparing the volatility
of the current account including remittances to that
excluding remittances: if remittances had little effect
on current account volatility, one would expect to
see a cluster of points (one for each country) along
a 45-degree line in the second panel of Figure 1.5.3.
Instead, a far larger cluster of points is observed above
the line, suggesting that remittances help stabilize the
current account, particularly in countries where the
value of remittances is sizable relative to GDP.
While remittances appear to help stabilize the
current account and are typically less correlated with
GDP than other external financing flows, what matters directly for societal welfare is the extent to which
household consumption is stabilized following shocks
to domestic income. Consumption growth tends to be
far more volatile in many, if not all, emerging market
and developing economies than in advanced economies. A much-touted benefit of international financial
integration would be the elimination of this “imperfection” in international risk sharing; yet that goal
remains elusive for most countries (see Prasad and others 2003; and Kose, Prasad, and Terrones 2009). The
question is whether greater international labor market
integration can help mitigate such financial market
imperfections through remittance flows and, if so,
under what circumstances and country characteristics.
This question can be examined in a standard
econometric model of risk sharing. Defining country-​
specific (that is, idiosyncratic) household consumption and output growth in country i at time t as ​
Δ ​​c​​ ̃ ​​  it​​  = ∆ ​c​ it​​  − ∆ ​ 
 ​
ct​  ​​​​ and ​Δ ​​y​​ ̃ ​​  it​​  = ∆ ​y​ it​​  − ∆ ​ 
 ​
yt​  ​​​​, where ​∆
 ​
 ​ ¯
ct​  ​​​​
¯
¯
is global household consumption growth and ​∆
 ​ ¯
 ​
yt​  ​​​​ is
global GDP per capita growth, the relevant regression
model can be written as:
​​Δ ​​c​​ ̃ ​​  it​​  = ​β​  1​​ Δ ​​y​​ ̃ ​​  it​​  + ​β​  2​​ ​Rit​  ​​ Δ ​​y​​ ̃ ​​  it​​  + ​β​  3​​ ​FI​ it​​ Δ ​​y​​ ̃ ​​  it​​ 
+ ϕ ​REER​  it​​  + ​λ​  t​​  + ​α​  i​​  + ​ε​  it​​,	 ​(​​1.5 . 1​)​​​​
where ​​λ​  t​​​ and ​​α​  i​​​denote time and country fixed effects
and ​​ε​  it​​​is the error term. ​​R​ it​​​ and ​​FI​ it​​​ are, respectively,
4This is true for both gross and net flows, as well as for
correlations in levels and in first differences in a broad
cross-country panel spanning 1990–2015. Looking at bilateral
remittance flows, Frankel (2011) finds that remittances are
mostly countercyclical for the recipient country. Yet, in some
cases, remittances sent primarily for investment motives can be
procyclical, even if to a lesser extent than portfolio or foreign
direct investment flows.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Box 1.5 (continued)
the remittances-to-GDP ratio and the sum of gross
foreign assets and liabilities as a share of GDP (the
usual de facto measure of international financial integration; see Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2017).5
If financial markets were perfect, consumption risk
would be shared equally across countries and relative
income growth would not matter for consumption,
so ​​β​  1​​  = ​β​  2​​ ​Rit​  ​​  = ​β​  3​​ ​FI​ it​​  = 0​. At the other extreme—
absent all risk sharing through foreign borrowing and
investment—​​β​  1​​  + ​β​  2​​ ​Rit​  ​​  + ​β​  3​​ ​FI​ it​​​should be equal to
one. Given financial market imperfections, ​​β​  1​​​is never
zero; yet greater financial and labor market integration
should help reduce the overall correlation between
idiosyncratic consumption and output growth, implying that the coefficients on the interaction terms, ​​β​  2​​​
and ​​β​  3​​​, are expected to be negative.
Results of the estimation of equation (1.5.1)
confirm that remittances facilitate consumption
smoothing. Estimates of equation (1.5.1) indicate
that the expected negative signs on the coefficients
are typically observed and, more crucially, that ​​β​  2​​​ is
statistically significant—that is, remittances reduce
the dependence of consumption on the home country
GDP and thus improve risk sharing.6 On a broad
cross-country basis (which includes countries receiving
both high and low remittances as well as more and
less financially integrated countries), about 27 percent

Figure 1.5.3. Smoothing Effects of
Remittances

5Except for the second and third terms on the right-hand
side of equation (1.5.1), this regression specification has been
standard in the macro literature on international risk sharing (for
example, Obstfeld 1993; Lewis 1996; Kalemli-Ozcan, Sorensen,
and Yosha 2003; Kose, Prasad, and Terrones 2009). It was first
expanded to consider the financial integration interaction term
by Sorensen and others (2005) and then augmented to include
the remittances interaction term by De and others (2016) and
later by Beaton, Cevik, and Yousefi (2017) and Beaton and
others (2017). Catão and Chang (2017) show how the micro
foundations of the standard risk-sharing equation emanate from
a model of costly financial transfers at the household level,
implying that the coefficient on the relative income term is
effectively a measure of financial frictions; and that under these
circumstances, the coefficient ϕ on the real effective exchange
rate (defined as appreciation, denoting a rise in the index) can
take either a positive or a negative sign (as with frictionless financial markets). They also show that that coefficient is influenced
by country-specific pricing structures in goods markets, and so is
bound to display considerable cross-country heterogeneity and be
less precisely estimated in pooled regressions. Underlying econometric work for this box supports that prior, so that coefficient is
unimportant in the present context.
6This result is consistent with De and others (2016); Beaton
and others (2017); and Beaton, Cevik, and Yousefi (2017).

Sources: World Bank Remittances database; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: Total inﬂows refers to total capital inﬂows to a country;
other inﬂows refers to ﬂows other than foreign direct
investment, portfolio, equity, derivatives, or reserves.
Volatility refers to the standard deviation. AEs = advanced
economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing
economies.

0.40 1. Volatility of Inﬂows
(Standard deviation of ﬂows as a percent
0.35
of GDP)
0.30
Remittances
0.25
Foreign direct investment
0.20
Total inﬂows
Other inﬂows
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

High
remittance
receivers

EMDEs

AEs

World

Volatility of the current account
without remittances

0.25 2. Current Account Volatility with and
without Remittances
(Percent of GDP)
0.20
0.15
0.10
High remittance
receivers
Others

0.05
0.00
0.00

0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Volatility of the current account

0.25

of variation in income that is smoothed is due to
remittances (Figure 1.5.4, panel 1, first bar). In other
words, for any extra dollar of income lost (for whatever reason) in the home country, consumption falls
by only 63 cents, all else constant. The quantitative
importance of remittances also far exceeds that yielded
by the financial integration term (as measured by ​​β​  3​​ ​
FI​ it​​​in equation (1.5.1)). Subsequent bars in panel 1
of Figure 1.5.4 show that the effects can be somewhat
larger (as a proportion of the total smoothed component) for high-remittance countries, during major
country-specific financial shocks (financial crises),

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

57

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 1.5 (continued)
Figure 1.5.4. Contribution of Remittances to
Consumption Risk Sharing
0.35 1. Portion of Total Risks Shared
0.30

Remittances
Other

0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

Full sample

High
remittances

Financial
crises

Commodity
terms of
trade shock

0.5 2. Portion of Total Risks Shared
0.4

Remittances
Other

0.3
0.2

High remittances:
main source of remittances,
noncommodity exporter

Noncommodity exporter
and high remittances

Commodity exporter and
high remittances

Noncommodity
exporters

0.0

Commodity
exporters

0.1

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Estimates of the portion of total risks shared are based
on coefﬁcients from panel regressions of idiosyncratic
consumption growth on idiosyncratic output growth and its
interactions with indicators for remittances and ﬁnancial
integration (Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2017). High remittance
countries refers to those countries with remittance inﬂows
greater than the median of 1.5 percent of GDP over 1990–
2014. A ﬁnancial crisis is deﬁned as either a banking crisis
as measured by the interval between the start and the end of
a banking crisis from the banking crises database by Laeven
and Valencia (2008, 2010, 2012) or an external crisis as
deﬁned by Catão and Milesi-Ferretti (2014). A negative
commodity terms-of-trade shock is deﬁned as a negative
value of the detrended component of a country’s commodity
terms of trade based on Gruss (2014).

58

and during cyclical contractions in the commodity
terms of trade.
Breaking the sample up by country characteristics
reveals that, if the receiving country is a commodity
exporter, the contribution of remittances to consumption smoothing is higher than that for noncommodity
exporters (Figure 1.5.4, panel 2, first two bars). If the
country is a high-remittance receiver and a commodity
exporter (third bar), the contribution is overwhelming.
Finally, the source country of remittances also matters:
if the source country is a noncommodity exporter, the
percentage contribution to total consumption smoothing is higher than if the host country is a commodity
exporter (comparing the relative portions in the last
bar of Figure 1.5.4, panel 2, to that of the second bar
of panel 1).7
These findings indicate that remittances have
played a significant role in consumption smoothing
in less financially integrated emerging market and
developing economies, particularly during periods of local financial crises and falling commodity
prices. The results also indicate that the main destination country of the migrant pool matters: if the
remittances-receiving country is a commodity exporter
and the remittances-sending country is not, the risks
to consumption are more effectively shared.
The overarching conclusion is that international
labor market integration can help fill at least some of
the consumption smoothing gap caused by the limited
role of financial market integration, particularly in
poorer countries. Considering such benefits, policy
measures that help reduce the cost of remittances (such
as those aimed at preserving correspondent banking
relationships) and foster international labor market
integration—so that remittances can play a fuller role
in transferring resources during asymmetric shocks to
receiving countries—can significantly enhance worldwide sharing of consumption risk.
7Through converse reasoning, the contribution of remittances
to risk sharing should also be higher than average if the sending
country is a commodity exporter and the receiving country is a
net commodity importer: in this case, booming commodity prices
should increase remittances out of the sending country, mitigating the negative effects of lower income in the receiving country
caused by adverse terms of trade (and vice versa). Unfortunately,
the remittances data sample for this subcase is small and estimates
are bound to be less precise and are therefore not reported.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

Special Feature  Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts

Special Feature: Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
Commodity prices have decreased since the release of the
April 2017 World Economic Outlook (WEO). Despite
the extension of the production agreement by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC),
oil prices declined amid stronger-than-expected shale
production in the United States. After declining earlier
this year, metal prices have bounced back since June, in
line with the improvement in macroeconomic sentiment.
Agricultural prices declined on account of large supplies,
but weather contributed to volatility in grain markets.
The IMF’s Primary Commodities Price Index
declined 5.0 percent between February 2017 and August
2017, the reference periods for the April 2017 and current WEO forecasts, respectively (Figure 1. SF.1, panel
1). While energy and food prices declined substantially,
by 6.5 percent and 4.3 percent, respectively, metal prices
increased modestly, by 0.8 percent. Oil prices declined
amid strong crude oil production in the United States.
Natural gas prices fell because of lower demand. Coal
prices increased, and remained high.

Oil Market: Eyes on US Production
On May 25, 2017, OPEC agreed to extend to
March 2018 the production agreement in place since
January this year. The agreement entails a cut of
1.2 million barrels a day (mbd) from October 2016
production. Russia and other non-OPEC countries
agreed to stick to current production, implying additional cuts of about 0.6 mbd from the October 2016
level (bringing the total cuts to 1.8 mbd).
Notwithstanding efforts by the oil exporters
participating in the production agreement, oil prices
had fallen to less than $44 a barrel by late June, the
lowest since November 2016, right before the initial
production cuts were announced. The main drivers
were stronger-than-expected US shale production and
stronger-than-expected production recovery in Libya
and Nigeria, which are exempt from production cuts.
In addition, exports from OPEC countries appeared
to be sustained at relatively high levels, even with
lower production.

Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments
300 1. Commodity Price Indices
(2005 = 100)
260

All commodities
Food

Energy
Metals

220
180
140
100
60
20

2005 06

07

08

09

10

11

12

13

14

15

Aug. 17

80 2. Brent Futures Curves
(US dollars a barrel; expiration dates on x-axis)
70
60
50
40
October 2017 WEO
30
April 2017 WEO
October 2016 WEO
20
April 2016 WEO
10
0
Apr. 2016
Dec. 17
Aug. 19
Apr. 21
1

200 3. Brent Price Prospects 2
(US dollars a barrel)
160

Futures
68 percent conﬁdence interval
86 percent conﬁdence interval
95 percent conﬁdence interval

120
80
40
0

2010

11

12

13

14

180 4. Metal Price Indices
(Jan. 2, 2014 = 100)
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
Jan. 2014 July 14 Jan. 15 July 15

15

16

17

Aluminum
Iron Ore

Jan. 16

July 16

18

19

20

Copper
Nickel

Jan. 17

Jul. 17

Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; Thomson Reuters Datastream; IMF, Primary Commodity
Price System; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1 WEO future prices are baseline assumptions for each WEO and derived from
future prices. October 2017 WEO prices are based on August 15, 2017, closing.
2 Derived from prices of futures options on August 15, 2017.

The authors of this feature are Christian Bogmans (team leader),
Rachel Yuting Fan, and Akito Matsumoto, with research assistance
from Lama Kiyasseh.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

59

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Since then, oil prices have rebounded, to about
$50 a barrel as of late August, in response to signs of
a slowdown in US production growth. US inventories
increased dramatically in June 2017, but declined
sharply in July and August. The US Energy Information Administration expects US crude production in
2018 to reach 9.9 mbd, exceeding the previous high of
9.6 mbd recorded in 1970. The International Energy
Agency expects demand growth to increase from 1.3
mbd in 2016 to 1.6 mbd in 2017 and then to soften
to 1.4 mbd in 2018. Hurricane Harvey impacted
US refinery capacity in late August and spot gasoline
prices increased sharply. However, crude oil prices
and medium-term gasoline futures reacted much less,
partially because crude inventories were large, and
reduced production of refined oil translates into weaker
demand for crude oil.
The natural gas price index—an average for Europe,
Japan, and the United States—decreased by 9.6 percent between February 2017 and August 2017,
reflecting seasonal factors and firm supply from the
United States and Russia.1 Lower oil prices add extra
downward pressures in countries where oil-linked pricing is more common. Markets were relatively unfazed
when Saudi Arabia and a coalition of countries severed
diplomatic ties with Qatar, the world’s largest LNG
exporter, as exports from Qatar continue.
The coal price index—an average of Australian
and South African prices—increased by 16.5 percent
from February 2017 to August 2017. This increase
follows an initial decline caused by the end of the
disruption to coal transportation in Australia due to
Cyclone Debbie on March 28, 2017. However, strong
demand from China helped prices recover. In addition,
sporadic labor disputes in Australian mines provided
additional support, while import restrictions by China
put downward pressure on prices, especially for lower-​
quality coals.
Oil futures contracts point to a gradual increase of
prices to about $53 a barrel in 2022 (Figure 1.SF.1,
panel 2). Baseline assumptions for the IMF’s average
petroleum spot prices, based on futures prices, suggest
1The IMF’s natural gas price index is a weighted average of US
Henry Hub prices, Netherland’s Title Transfer Facility prices, and
Argus Northeast Asia liquefied natural gas (LNG) prices. Up to
December 2016, the index is the average of US Henry Hub, German border prices from Russia (long-term contract), and Japanese
LNG import prices from Indonesia (Japanese Custom-cleared
Crude indexed). The update reflects the increased importance of
spot markets.

60

average annual prices of $50.3 a barrel in 2017—an
increase of 17.4 percent from the 2016 average—and
$50.2 a barrel in 2018 (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 3).
Uncertainty remains around the baseline assumptions for oil prices, although risks are balanced. Upside
risks include unscheduled outages and geopolitical
events, especially in the Middle East and Latin America as the United States put additional sanctions on
Venezuela. Although these development could cause oil
market disruptions, high inventories—including drilled
but uncompleted wells—and the rapid response by
shale producers should prevent sharp price rises in the
near future. As oil markets focus on the US production/inventory figure, Hurricane Harvey may influence
crude markets significantly if it turns out that physical
damages to infrastructure or labor force dislocation
are larger than initially assessed. Natural gas markets
face additional uncertainty due to the Qatar crisis
and renewed tensions between Russia and the United
States after the United States approved new sanctions
against Russia.

Metals: China in the Mix
Metal prices have increased by 0.8 percent between
February and August 2017, with considerable variation
across commodities. By June the metal price index had
reached its lowest point in eight months due to slower
demand growth in China and the United States. However, prices rebounded since and continued to do so
into August with the improvement in macroeconomic
sentiment, especially in China.
Iron ore prices dropped by 35 percent between
February and June 2017, mainly driven by expansion
of production by big producers in Australia and Brazil
attempting to increase market share. Iron ore inventories at Chinese ports reached an all-time high of more
than 140 million tons by late June, up 40 percent
from the year before, according to data from Thomson
Reuters Datastream. With steel prices in China soaring
again, however, China’s steel producers increased
output to a record high of 74 million tons in July.
This, in turn, drove up demand for the key ingredient
in steelmaking, especially for higher-grade ores that
increase the efficiency of steel mills and help lower air
pollution. As a result, the price of iron ore rallied by
29 percent from its low in June, reaching an average of
$74.6 per ton in August.
Copper prices tumbled between February and early
May, after strikes at major mines in Chile and Peru

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

SPECIAL FEATURE

ended, and the export ban in Indonesia was temporarily lifted. However, with supply from Chile again
disrupted and larger-than-expected demand, copper prices rebounded since June. In August, further
boosted by China’s possible ban by the end of 2018
on imports of scrap metals, copper stood 9.2 percent
higher than in February, reaching its highest level since
November 2014. The partial resumption of ore exports
from Indonesia had also put downward pressure on
nickel prices in the first half of 2017. Then, buoyed by
solid demand for stainless steel, particularly in China’s
construction sector, the price of nickel experienced a
strong recovery through July and was up by 2.3 percent in August compared with February.
Aluminum prices increased by 9.1 percent from
February 2017 to August 2017, supported by a global
shortage outside of China that, according to data
from the World Bureau of Metal Statistics, began in
the fall of 2016. By mid-August 2017, London Metal
Exchange warehouse inventories of aluminum were
44 percent lower than in mid-January, hitting their
lowest point since 2008. On top of the increase so far,
futures prices are pointing to a sharp rise in prices,
likely fueled by expectations that China will cut its
production capacity because of environmental concerns. Zinc rallied by 4.8 percent between February
and August to a near 10-year high, following stock
reductions, tight supplies and strong demand for steel
galvanization, especially from Chinese infrastructure
development.
The IMF metal price index is projected to rise
briefly in the second half of 2017, followed by a gentle
decline. The annual index for 2017 is expected to
increase by 20.6 percent from its 2016 level, reflecting
the earlier surge this year, while futures are pointing
to a slight decline throughout 2018, with the current
projection for the fourth quarter of 2018 0.4 percent
below the level for the third quarter of 2017.
Downside risks to the outlook for metal prices
include credit tightening and a slowing down of China’s property market, which consumes more than half
of the world’s metal production. However, the Caixin
Manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index increased
to 51.6 in August, indicating further expansion of
the world’s biggest manufacturing sector in the near
term. Upside risks also include vigorous capacity cuts
in China and the possibility of greater restrictions on
international trade, such as those potentially arising from the US Section 232 investigations for steel
and aluminum.

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts

Price Swings in Agricultural Markets
The IMF’s agricultural price index decreased by
4.9 percent from February 2017 to August 2017, with
the sub-indices of food, beverages, and agricultural raw
materials decreasing by 4.3 percent, 4.3 percent, and
6.9 percent, respectively. The decline has been fairly
uniform across different food groups as well; the indices for cereals lost 4.0 percent, sugar 27.5 percent, vegetable oils 6.5 percent, and beverages 4.3 percent, with
only the index for meat seeing gains, of 6.3 percent.
Wheat prices decreased by 5.6 percent from February 2017 to August 2017. As hot, dry weather on the
US Great Plains and in France raised doubts about
yields in the Northern Hemisphere, prices increased
sharply in June. The price rally was followed, however, by a 20.3 percent decline, month-on-month,
in August, after the United States Department of
Agriculture unexpectedly raised its forecast of grain
stocks at the end of the 2017–18 season for reasons
that include prospects of a record upcoming Black Sea
harvest of wheat.
Maize prices declined too, by 8.8 percent. Weather
in the corn-growing regions of the United States did
not affect prices much, and corn supplies, including from other major producing countries in South
America, remain abundant. Soybean prices trended
downward from February because supply from South
America remains plentiful following a record harvest in
Brazil, even though a stronger real discourages farmers
from selling their produce. Prospects of a relatively
large upcoming US soybean crop increased on good
weather conditions in the critical growing month of
August, also putting downward pressure on prices.
Palm oil prices fell by 12.0 percent from February
2017 to August 2017, as production in Malaysia and
Indonesia continued to rebound from the 2015–16
El Niño, and are expected to increase further, partly
because of seasonal factors. Indeed, palm oil future
curves remain in “backwardation,” indicating that supply is expected to be relatively more abundant in the
future. With China continuing to sell off its reserves,
and the upcoming US crop not severely affected by
Hurricane Harvey, cotton prices declined by 6.8 percent between February 2017 and August 2017. Furthermore, output in the 2017–18 season is expected
to be buoyant in major producers, including China,
India, Pakistan, and the United States.
Pork prices increased substantially up to July amid
stronger demand and tighter supplies. Following
increases in global supplies, prices have slumped,
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

61

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

although they still stood 10.1 percent higher in August
compared to February this year (based on monthly
averages). While supplies are expected to increase
further in the second half of 2017, strong global
demand implies that markets are expected to clear at
higher year-over-year prices. Similarly, the price of
beef climbed steadily, by 2.4 percent, because export
demand for red meat was stronger than expected and
leaner cattle contributed to weaker US supply growth.
As the number of cattle on US feedlots has increased
unexpectedly during summer, prices are expected to
soften in the second half of this year.
Projections for grain prices have been revised substantially downward because concerns over hot, dry
weather that sparked a rally in grain markets in June
this year have waned, and forecasts for grain stocks at

62

the end of the 2017–18 season increased in August.
Annual food prices are now expected to increase
by 3.6 percent in 2017 and an additional 1.1 percent in 2018. Food prices are expected to decline
slightly again for the years thereafter for reasons that
include potentially better supply conditions for some
commodities.
Weather disruptions and variability are an upside
risk to the forecast for agricultural prices. As of
September 2017, there is an increasing chance (about
55 percent to 60 percent) of a La Niña onset during
the Northern Hemisphere fall and winter of 2017–18.
The increased use by governments of agricultural
support policies is another upside risk. Downside risks
may arise if China sells more than anticipated from its
large reserves of grains, sugar, and cotton.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Projections
2016
2017
2018
2.1
2.5
2.2

Europe

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2016
2017
2018
0.9
2.5
2.4

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2016
2017
2018
2.2
2.4
2.3

Unemployment3
Projections
2016
2017
2018
...
...
...

Advanced Europe
Euro Area4,5
Germany
France
Italy
Spain

1.8
1.8
1.9
1.2
0.9
3.2

2.1
2.1
2.0
1.6
1.5
3.1

1.9
1.9
1.8
1.8
1.1
2.5

0.4
0.2
0.4
0.3
–0.1
–0.2

1.6
1.5
1.6
1.2
1.4
2.0

1.6
1.4
1.5
1.3
1.2
1.5

2.7
3.5
8.3
–1.0
2.6
1.9

2.9
3.1
8.1
–1.1
2.7
1.9

2.9
3.0
7.7
–0.8
2.3
2.0

8.7
10.0
4.2
10.0
11.7
19.6

7.9
9.2
3.8
9.5
11.4
17.1

7.6
8.7
3.7
9.0
11.0
15.6

Netherlands
Belgium
Austria
Greece
Portugal

2.2
1.2
1.5
0.0
1.4

3.1
1.6
2.3
1.8
2.5

2.6
1.6
1.9
2.6
2.0

0.1
1.8
1.0
0.0
0.6

1.3
2.2
1.6
1.2
1.6

1.4
1.5
1.8
1.3
2.0

8.5
–0.4
1.7
–0.6
0.7

10.0
–0.3
2.1
–0.2
0.4

10.0
0.0
2.2
–0.1
0.3

5.9
7.9
6.0
23.6
11.1

5.1
7.5
5.4
22.3
9.7

4.9
7.3
5.3
20.7
9.0

Ireland
Finland
Slovak Republic
Lithuania
Slovenia

5.1
1.9
3.3
2.3
3.1

4.1
2.8
3.3
3.5
4.0

3.4
2.3
3.7
3.5
2.5

–0.2
0.4
–0.5
0.7
–0.1

0.4
0.8
1.2
3.5
1.6

1.5
1.2
1.4
2.0
1.8

3.3
–1.1
–0.7
–0.9
5.2

3.4
0.4
0.3
–1.6
5.0

3.5
0.4
0.2
–1.4
4.9

7.9
8.8
9.6
7.9
8.0

6.4
8.7
8.1
7.0
6.8

5.9
8.1
7.5
6.5
6.4

Luxembourg
Latvia
Estonia
Cyprus
Malta

4.2
2.0
2.1
2.8
5.5

3.9
3.8
4.0
3.4
5.1

3.6
3.9
3.7
2.6
4.4

0.0
0.1
0.8
–1.2
0.9

1.2
3.0
3.8
0.8
1.3

1.3
3.0
3.4
0.7
1.6

4.7
1.5
1.9
–5.3
7.9

4.7
–0.3
1.8
–3.8
8.9

4.9
–1.5
1.4
–2.7
8.8

6.4
9.6
6.8
13.0
4.7

5.9
9.0
8.4
11.8
4.4

5.5
8.7
9.0
10.7
4.5

United Kingdom5
Switzerland
Sweden
Norway
Czech Republic

1.8
1.4
3.2
1.1
2.6

1.7
1.0
3.1
1.4
3.5

1.5
1.3
2.4
1.6
2.6

0.7
–0.4
1.1
3.6
0.7

2.6
0.5
1.6
2.1
2.3

2.6
0.6
1.6
2.0
1.8

–4.4
10.5
4.5
5.0
1.1

–3.6
9.9
3.9
5.5
0.6

–3.3
9.4
3.7
5.7
0.1

4.9
3.3
7.0
4.7
4.0

4.4
3.0
6.6
4.0
2.8

4.4
3.0
6.3
3.8
3.0

Denmark
Iceland
San Marino

1.7
7.2
1.0

1.9
5.5
1.2

1.8
3.3
1.3

0.3
1.7
0.6

1.0
1.8
0.9

1.4
2.6
1.0

7.9
7.9
...

7.3
6.2
...

7.0
6.1
...

6.2
3.0
8.6

5.8
2.8
8.0

5.8
3.2
7.4

Emerging and Developing Europe6
Turkey
Poland
Romania

3.1
3.2
2.6
4.8

4.5
5.1
3.8
5.5

3.5
3.5
3.3
4.4

3.3
7.8
–0.6
–1.6

6.0
10.9
1.9
1.1

5.7
9.3
2.3
3.3

–1.8
–3.8
–0.2
–2.3

–2.4
–4.6
–1.0
–3.0

–2.5
–4.6
–1.2
–2.9

...
10.9
6.2
5.9

...
11.2
4.8
5.3

...
10.7
4.0
5.2

Hungary
2.0
3.2
3.4
0.4
2.5
3.2
5.5
4.8
4.2
5.1
4.4
Bulgaria5
3.4
3.6
3.2
–1.3
1.1
1.4
4.2
2.5
1.9
7.7
6.6
Serbia
2.8
3.0
3.5
1.1
3.4
3.0
–4.0
–4.0
–3.9
15.9
16.0
Croatia
3.0
2.9
2.7
–1.1
1.1
1.2
2.6
3.8
3.0
15.0
13.9
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Current account position corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions.
5Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices except for Slovenia.
6Includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, FYR Macedonia, and Montenegro.

4.3
6.4
15.6
13.5

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

63

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
2016
5.4
1.7
1.0
2.8
2.5
1.5
2.0

Asia
Advanced Asia
Japan
Korea
Australia
Taiwan Province of China
Singapore
Hong Kong SAR
New Zealand
Macao SAR
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India4
ASEAN-5
Indonesia
Thailand
Malaysia
Philippines
Vietnam
Other Emerging and Developing
Asia5

Real GDP
Projections
2017
2018
5.6
5.5
2.2
1.7
1.5
0.7
3.0
3.0
2.2
2.9
2.0
1.9
2.5
2.6

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2016
2017
2018
2.3
2.3
2.8
0.5
1.0
1.2
–0.1
0.4
0.5
1.0
1.9
1.9
1.3
2.0
2.2
1.4
1.0
1.4
–0.5
0.9
1.3

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2016
2017
2018
2.5
2.1
1.9
4.5
4.3
4.2
3.8
3.6
3.8
7.0
5.6
5.4
–2.6
–1.6
–2.4
14.0
13.8
13.9
19.0
19.6
19.5

Unemployment3
Projections
2016
2017
2018
...
...
...
3.6
3.4
3.4
3.1
2.9
2.9
3.7
3.8
3.6
5.7
5.6
5.4
3.9
3.8
3.8
2.1
2.2
2.1

2.0
3.6
–2.1

3.5
3.5
13.4

2.7
3.0
7.0

2.6
0.6
2.4

2.0
2.2
1.5

2.2
2.0
2.2

4.6
–2.8
27.4

3.0
–3.6
33.0

3.1
–3.8
34.5

2.7
5.1
1.9

2.6
4.9
2.0

2.6
4.6
2.0

6.4
6.7
7.1

6.5
6.8
6.7

6.5
6.5
7.4

2.8
2.0
4.5

2.6
1.8
3.8

3.2
2.4
4.9

1.4
1.7
–0.7

0.9
1.4
–1.4

0.7
1.2
–1.5

...
4.0
...

...
4.0
...

...
4.0
...

4.9
5.0
3.2
4.2
6.9
6.2

5.2
5.2
3.7
5.4
6.6
6.3

5.2
5.3
3.5
4.8
6.7
6.3

2.4
3.5
0.2
2.1
1.8
2.7

3.3
4.0
0.6
3.8
3.1
4.4

3.1
3.9
1.0
2.9
3.0
4.0

2.1
–1.8
11.5
2.4
0.2
4.1

1.6
–1.7
10.1
2.4
–0.1
1.3

1.1
–1.8
8.1
2.2
–0.3
1.4

...
5.6
0.8
3.5
5.5
2.3

...
5.4
0.7
3.4
6.0
2.3

...
5.2
0.7
3.2
5.5
2.3

5.6

6.3

6.3

5.2

5.5

5.4

–0.9

–1.9

–2.5

...

...

...

Memorandum
6.5
6.5
6.5
2.7
2.5
3.1
1.5
1.0
0.8
...
...
...
Emerging Asia6
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4See country-specific notes for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
5Other Emerging and Developing Asia comprises Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Fiji, Kiribati, Lao P.D.R., Maldives, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu.
6Emerging Asia comprises the ASEAN-5 (Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam) economies, China, and India.

64

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Projections
2017
2018
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.3
3.0
2.1
2.1
1.9
–2.8
–2.5

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2016
2017
2018
1.4
2.4
2.3
1.3
2.1
2.1
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.8
5.9
3.8
–0.3
1.1
0.9

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2016
2017
2018
–2.5
–2.4
–2.6
–2.4
–2.4
–2.6
–3.3
–3.4
–2.9
–2.2
–1.7
–2.0
...
...
...

Unemployment3
Projections
2016
2017
2018
...
...
...
4.9
4.4
4.1
7.0
6.5
6.3
3.9
3.6
3.7
11.8
11.5
11.6

North America
United States
Canada
Mexico
Puerto Rico4

2016
1.5
1.5
1.5
2.3
–2.6

South America5
Brazil
Argentina
Colombia
Venezuela

–2.6
–3.6
–2.2
2.0
–16.5

0.6
0.7
2.5
1.7
–12.0

1.6
1.5
2.5
2.8
–6.0

...
8.7
...
7.5
254.4

...
3.7
26.9
4.3
652.7

...
4.0
17.8
3.3
2,349.3

–1.8
–1.3
–2.7
–4.3
–1.6

–1.9
–1.4
–3.6
–3.8
–0.4

–2.3
–1.8
–3.7
–3.6
–1.3

...
11.3
8.5
9.2
20.6

...
13.1
8.1
9.3
26.4

...
11.8
7.7
9.2
29.8

1.6
4.0
–1.5
4.3
1.5
4.1

1.4
2.7
0.2
4.2
3.5
3.9

2.5
3.8
0.6
4.0
3.1
4.0

3.8
3.6
1.7
3.6
9.6
4.1

2.3
3.2
0.7
3.2
6.1
3.5

2.7
2.3
0.7
5.1
6.3
4.0

–1.4
–2.7
1.4
–5.7
–0.1
1.7

–2.3
–1.5
–0.7
–4.7
–0.4
1.1

–2.8
–1.6
–1.6
–4.8
–0.8
0.4

6.5
6.7
5.2
4.0
7.9
6.0

7.0
6.7
5.1
4.0
7.3
6.5

6.8
6.7
5.3
4.0
7.3
6.2

3.7

3.8

3.9

2.1

2.8

3.2

–2.9

–2.9

–2.8

...

...

...

Chile
Peru
Ecuador
Bolivia
Uruguay
Paraguay
Central America6

Caribbean7
3.4
2.8
4.4
2.6
3.8
3.8
–4.1
–4.1
–4.3
...
...
...
Memorandum
–0.9
1.2
1.9
5.6
4.2
3.6
–2.0
–2.0
–2.3
...
...
...
Latin America and the Caribbean8
2.6
2.6
2.8
–0.7
1.3
1.4
–5.4
–6.6
–7.4
...
...
...
East Caribbean Currency Union9
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Puerto Rico is a territory of the United States but its statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
5Includes Guyana and Suriname. Data for Argentina’s and Venezuela’s consumer prices are excluded. See country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the
“Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6Central America comprises Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama.
7The Caribbean comprises Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, Barbados, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Grenada, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent
and the Grenadines, and Trinidad and Tobago.
8Latin America and the Caribbean comprises Mexico and economies from the Caribbean, Central America, and South America. Data for Argentina’s and Venezuela’s
consumer prices are excluded. See country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
9Eastern Caribbean Currency Union comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines as well as
Anguilla and Montserrat, which are not IMF members.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

65

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Annex Table 1.1.4. Commonwealth of Independent States Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account
Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Projections
2016
2017
2018
0.4
2.1
2.1

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2016
2017
2018
8.3
5.8
5.2

Net Energy Exporters
Russia
Kazakhstan
Uzbekistan
Azerbaijan
Turkmenistan

0.3
–0.2
1.1
7.8
–3.1
6.2

2.1
1.8
3.3
6.0
–1.0
6.5

2.0
1.6
2.8
6.0
1.3
6.3

7.9
7.0
14.6
8.0
12.4
3.6

5.2
4.2
7.3
13.0
12.0
6.0

4.7
3.9
6.5
12.7
8.0
6.2

0.5
2.0
–6.4
0.7
–3.6
–21.0

1.6
2.8
–5.3
0.9
1.9
–15.4

2.0
3.2
–3.8
0.3
2.5
–14.3

...
5.5
5.0
...
6.0
...

...
5.5
5.0
...
6.0
...

...
5.5
5.0
...
6.0
...

Net Energy Importers
Ukraine
Belarus
Georgia
Armenia
Tajikistan

1.2
2.3
–2.6
2.7
0.2
6.9

2.1
2.0
0.7
4.0
3.5
4.5

2.7
3.2
0.7
4.2
2.9
4.0

11.0
13.9
11.8
2.1
–1.4
5.9

10.0
12.8
8.0
6.0
1.9
8.9

8.3
10.0
7.5
3.0
3.5
8.0

–4.7
–4.1
–3.6
–13.3
–2.3
–3.8

–4.9
–3.3
–5.3
–11.9
–3.6
–6.3

–4.5
–3.0
–4.6
–10.7
–3.2
–6.2

...
9.3
1.0
11.8
18.8
...

...
9.5
1.0
...
18.9
...

...
9.3
1.0
...
18.9
...

Commonwealth of Independent States4

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2016
2017
2018
0.0
0.9
1.3

Unemployment3
Projections
2016
2017
2018
...
...
...

Kyrgyz Republic
3.8
3.5
3.8
0.4
3.8
5.1
–9.7
–11.6
–12.0
7.5
7.4
7.3
Moldova
4.3
4.0
3.7
6.4
6.5
5.3
–3.8
–4.0
–4.0
4.2
4.3
4.2
Memorandum
2.5
3.6
3.7
10.4
8.8
7.8
–6.4
–4.9
–4.2
...
...
...
Caucasus and Central Asia5
6.1
5.2
5.2
5.8
10.0
9.6
–2.5
–2.7
–3.1
...
...
...
Low-Income CIS Countries6
Net Energy Exporters Excluding Russia
2.4
3.5
3.7
11.6
9.3
8.2
–6.2
–4.4
–3.6
...
...
...
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Table A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), are included in this group for reasons of geography and
similarity in economic structure.
5Caucasus and Central Asia comprises Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan.
6Low-Income CIS countries comprise Armenia, Georgia, the Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.

66

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Annex Table 1.1.5. Middle East, North African Economies, Afghanistan, and Pakistan: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current
Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Projections
2016
2017
2018

Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2016
2017
2018

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2016
2017
2018

Unemployment3
Projections
2016
2017
2018

5.0

2.6

3.5

5.1

6.8

7.7

–4.1

–1.9

–1.6

...

...

...

5.6
1.7
12.5
3.0
3.3
11.0

1.7
0.1
3.5
1.3
1.5
–0.4

3.0
1.1
3.8
3.4
0.8
2.9

4.6
3.5
9.0
1.8
6.4
0.4

4.3
–0.2
10.5
2.1
5.5
2.0

6.0
5.0
10.1
2.9
4.4
2.0

–3.6
–4.3
4.1
2.4
–16.5
–8.7

–0.4
0.6
5.1
2.1
–13.0
–6.3

–0.2
0.4
5.9
2.1
–10.8
–6.7

...
5.6
12.5
...
10.5
...

...
...
12.4
...
11.7
...

...
...
12.4
...
13.2
...

Qatar
Kuwait

2.2
2.5

2.5
–2.1

3.1
4.1

2.7
3.5

0.9
2.5

4.8
2.7

–4.9
–4.5

2.3
–0.6

1.0
–1.4

...
2.1

...
2.1

...
2.1

Oil Importers5
Egypt
Pakistan
Morocco
Sudan
Tunisia
Lebanon
Jordan

3.6
4.3
4.5
1.2
3.0
1.0
1.0
2.0

4.3
4.1
5.3
4.8
3.7
2.3
1.5
2.3

4.4
4.5
5.6
3.0
3.6
3.0
2.0
2.5

6.2
10.2
2.9
1.6
17.8
3.7
–0.8
–0.8

12.1
23.5
4.1
0.9
26.9
4.5
3.1
3.3

11.2
21.3
4.8
1.6
19.0
4.4
2.5
1.5

–5.3
–6.0
–1.7
–4.4
–5.6
–9.0
–18.6
–9.3

–5.3
–5.9
–4.0
–4.0
–1.9
–8.7
–18.0
–8.4

–4.8
–3.8
–4.9
–2.9
–2.0
–8.4
–16.8
–8.3

...
12.7
6.0
9.4
20.6
14.0
...
15.3

...
12.2
6.0
9.3
19.6
13.0
...
...

...
11.5
6.1
9.5
18.6
12.0
...
...

Oil Exporters4
Saudi Arabia
Iran
United Arab Emirates
Algeria
Iraq

Memorandum
Middle East and North Africa
5.1
2.2
3.2
5.4
7.1
8.1
–4.4
–1.7
–1.3
...
...
4.0
3.1
3.4
–0.5
0.2
0.5
3.6
4.1
3.1
4.8
4.3
Israel6
2.2
5.4
3.8
5.4
5.4
5.4
–12.1
–8.5
–5.6
...
...
Maghreb7
Mashreq8
3.9
3.8
4.2
8.7
20.7
18.7
–7.8
–8.2
–6.4
...
...
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Includes Bahrain, Libya, Oman, and Yemen.
5Includes Afghanistan, Djibouti, Mauritania, and Somalia. Excludes Syria because of the uncertain political situation.
6Israel, which is not a member of the economic region, is included for reasons of geography but is not included in the regional aggregates.
7The Maghreb comprises Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, and Tunisia.
8The Mashreq comprises Egypt, Jordan, and Lebanon. Syria is excluded because of the uncertain political situation.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

...
4.5
...
...

67

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Annex Table 1.1.6. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Projections
2016
2017
2018
1.4
2.6
3.4

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2016
2017
2018
11.3
11.0
9.5

–1.9
–1.6
–0.7
2.1
–6.4
–2.8

0.6
0.8
1.5
1.0
0.6
–3.6

1.6
1.9
1.6
2.7
2.4
2.8

18.8
15.7
32.4
2.1
–1.1
3.6

18.1
16.3
30.9
2.5
0.2
–0.4

14.7
14.8
20.6
2.5
1.9
–1.1

–2.0
0.7
–5.1
–10.2
–9.2
–70.1

–0.3
1.9
–4.8
–9.3
–2.0
–15.9

–0.6
1.0
–4.5
–6.7
–2.8
2.5

...
13.4
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...

Middle-Income Countries5
South Africa
Ghana
Côte d’Ivoire
Cameroon
Zambia
Senegal

2.0
0.3
3.5
7.7
4.7
3.4
6.7

2.5
0.7
5.9
7.6
4.0
4.0
6.8

3.2
1.1
8.9
7.3
4.6
4.5
7.0

6.8
6.3
17.5
0.7
0.9
17.9
0.9

5.3
5.4
11.8
1.0
0.7
6.8
2.1

5.1
5.3
9.0
2.0
1.1
7.4
2.2

–3.4
–3.3
–6.7
–1.1
–3.6
–4.4
–5.3

–3.2
–2.9
–5.8
–2.9
–3.6
–3.6
–5.1

–3.5
–3.3
–5.4
–2.8
–3.5
–2.8
–5.2

...
26.7
...
...
...
...
...

...
27.6
...
...
...
...
...

...
28.3
...
...
...
...
...

Low-Income Countries6
Ethiopia
Kenya
Tanzania
Uganda
Madagascar
Democratic Republic of the Congo

5.3
8.0
5.8
7.0
2.3
4.2
2.4

5.6
8.5
5.0
6.5
4.4
4.3
2.8

5.9
8.5
5.5
6.8
5.2
5.3
3.0

6.6
7.3
6.3
5.2
5.5
6.7
18.2

8.8
8.1
8.0
5.4
5.8
7.8
41.7

8.2
8.0
5.2
5.0
5.6
6.8
44.0

–8.3
–9.9
–5.2
–5.6
–4.3
0.8
–3.4

–7.9
–8.3
–6.1
–5.6
–5.6
–4.7
–4.6

–8.3
–7.4
–7.0
–6.5
–7.2
–5.3
–2.1

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

Sub-Saharan Africa
Oil Exporters4
Nigeria
Angola
Gabon
Chad
Republic of Congo

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2016
2017
2018
–4.2
–3.4
–3.6

Unemployment3
Projections
2016
2017
2018
...
...
...

Memorandum
Sub-Saharan Africa Excluding South
Sudan
1.5
2.7
3.4
10.4
10.5
9.3
–4.2
–3.4
–3.6
...
...
...
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Table A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Includes Equatorial Guinea and South Sudan.
5Includes Botswana, Cabo Verde, Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, Seychelles, and Swaziland.
6Includes Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, the Central African Republic, Comoros, Eritrea, The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique, Niger,
Rwanda, São Tomé and Príncipe, Sierra Leone, Togo, and Zimbabwe.

68

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Annex Table 1.1.7. Summary of World Real per Capita Output
(Annual percent change; purchasing power parity)
World Output
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area1
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies2
Emerging Market and Developing
Economies
Commonwealth of Independent
States
Russia
Excluding Russia
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India3
ASEAN-54
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East, North Africa,
Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Saudi Arabia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Nigeria
South Africa

Average
1999–2008
2.7

2009
–1.6

2010
4.0

2011
3.0

2012
2.0

2013
2.2

2014
2.3

2015
2.1

2016
1.9

2017
2.3

Projections
2018
2022
2.5
2.5

1.8
1.5
1.7
1.7
1.4
0.9
2.1
0.9
2.0
1.9
3.3

–4.0
–3.6
–4.9
–5.2
–3.5
–6.1
–4.4
–5.3
–5.0
–4.1
–1.9

2.5
1.7
1.8
4.2
1.5
1.2
–0.4
4.2
1.1
1.9
5.0

1.1
0.9
1.3
3.7
1.6
0.2
–1.4
–0.3
0.7
2.1
2.5

0.7
1.5
–1.1
0.5
–0.3
–3.2
–3.0
1.7
0.6
0.6
1.2

0.8
1.0
–0.5
0.3
0.1
–2.3
–1.3
2.2
1.3
1.3
1.6

1.6
1.8
1.1
1.5
0.4
–0.3
1.7
0.5
2.3
1.4
2.1

1.7
2.1
1.6
0.6
0.6
0.8
3.3
1.2
1.4
0.0
1.2

1.1
0.8
1.4
0.9
0.8
1.1
3.3
1.0
1.0
0.3
1.4

1.7
1.5
2.0
1.9
1.1
1.3
3.2
1.7
1.1
1.9
1.7

1.6
1.7
1.8
1.7
1.3
1.1
2.7
0.9
0.8
1.1
1.7

1.3
1.1
1.4
1.3
1.4
0.9
1.8
1.0
1.1
0.7
1.7

4.5

1.1

5.9

4.9

3.7

3.7

3.2

2.8

2.8

3.2

3.5

3.6

7.2
7.2
7.6
6.7
9.4
5.2
3.6
3.8
1.9
2.1
1.4

–6.9
–7.8
–3.9
6.4
8.7
6.9
1.0
–3.5
–3.1
–1.2
–6.0

4.3
4.5
4.4
8.5
10.1
8.7
5.5
4.0
4.7
6.5
3.8

4.9
5.0
5.1
6.7
9.0
5.2
3.2
6.0
3.4
3.0
2.8

3.2
3.6
2.6
5.9
7.4
4.1
4.7
2.0
1.8
1.0
2.8

2.0
1.7
3.4
5.9
7.3
5.0
3.7
4.3
1.8
2.1
0.2

1.5
0.7
2.7
5.8
6.7
6.1
3.2
3.4
0.1
–0.4
1.1

–2.6
–2.8
–1.6
5.7
6.4
6.6
3.5
4.2
–1.1
–4.6
1.6

0.0
–0.2
1.2
5.4
6.1
5.7
3.6
2.7
–2.1
–4.4
1.2

1.8
1.8
2.2
5.4
6.1
5.3
3.9
4.1
0.1
0.0
1.1

1.8
1.7
2.6
5.4
5.9
6.0
3.9
3.1
0.8
0.7
0.9

2.1
1.7
3.6
5.2
5.1
6.8
4.0
2.8
1.7
1.4
1.8

1.9
0.4
2.6
4.6
2.7

–1.2
–5.3
1.1
5.5
–2.9

2.4
1.3
4.2
8.3
1.6

4.0
7.1
2.5
2.1
1.8

1.0
2.5
1.2
1.5
0.7

0.3
–0.1
2.6
2.6
1.0

0.1
1.1
2.4
3.5
0.2

0.5
3.3
0.7
–0.1
–0.3

2.7
–0.6
–1.3
–4.2
–1.3

0.0
–1.8
0.0
–1.9
–0.9

1.5
–0.9
0.7
–0.8
–0.5

1.9
0.0
1.2
–1.0
0.6

Memorandum
European Union
2.1
–4.6
1.9
1.5
–0.6
0.1
1.5
1.9
1.6
2.1
1.9
Low-Income Developing Countries
3.4
3.5
5.2
3.7
2.4
3.8
3.7
2.2
1.2
2.2
3.0
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Data calculated as the sum of individual euro area countries.
2Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
3See country-specific notes for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

1.5
3.1

69

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

References
Aaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix
Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher. 2014.
“Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future
Prospects.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall.
Abiad, Abdul D., Davide Furceri, and Petia Topalova. 2016.
“The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment: Evidence
from Advanced Economies.” Journal of Macroeconomics 50
(C): 224–40.
Adams, Richard, and John Page. 2005. “Do International
Migration and Remittances Reduce Poverty in Developing
Countries?” World Development 33 (10): 1645–69.
Adler, Gustavo, Romain Duval, Davide Furceri, Sinem Kılıç
Çelik, Ksenia Koloskova, and Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro.
2017. “Gone with the Headwinds: Global Productivity.” IMF
Staff Discussion Note 17/04, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Adler, Gustavo, Nicolas Magud, and Alejandro Werner. 2017.
“Terms-of-Trade Cycles and External Adjustment.” IMF
Working Paper 17/29, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Aiyar, Shekhar, Christian Ebeke, and Xiaobo Shao. 2016. “The
Impact of Workforce Aging on European Productivity.”
IMF Working Paper 16/238, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Baldwin, Richard. 2016. “The Great Convergence: Information
Technology and the New Globalization.” Cambridge, MA,
Belknap Press.
Balleer, Almut, Ramón Gómez-Salvador, and Jarkko Turunen.
2009. “Labor Force Participation in the Euro Area: A Cohort
Based Analysis.” European Central Bank Working Paper
1049, European Central Bank, Frankfurt.
Banerji, Angana, Valerio Crispolti, Era Dabla-Norris, Romain A.
Duval, Christian H. Ebeke, Davide Furceri, Takuji Komatsuzaki, and Tigran Poghosyan. 2017. “Labor and Product
Market Reforms in Advanced Economies: Fiscal Costs, Gains,
and Support.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 17/03, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Beaton, Kimberly, Serhan Cevik, and Reza Yousefi. 2017. “Smooth
Operator: Remittances and Fiscal Shocks.” IMF Working Paper
17/165, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Beaton, Kimberly, Svetlana Cerovic, Misael Galdamez, Metodij
Hadzi-Vaskov, Franz Loyola, Zsoka Koczan, Bogdan Lissovolik, Jan Martijn, Yulia Ustyugova, and Joyce Wong. 2017.
“Migration and Remittances in Latin America and the Caribbean: Engines of Growth and Macroeconomic Stabilizers?”
IMF Working Paper 17/144, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Bems, Rudolfs, Robert C. Johnson, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2010.
“Demand Spillovers and the Collapse of Trade in the Global
Recession.” IMF Economic Review 58 (2): 295–326.
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2013. “Female
Labor Supply: Why is the US Falling Behind?” Institute of
Labor Economics, Discussion Paper 7140.

70

Bugamelli, Matteo, and Francesco Paterno. 2009. “Output
Growth Volatility and Remittances,” Economica, (78) 480–500.
Caldara, Dario, and Matteo Iacoviello. 2017. “Measuring
Geopolitical Risk.” Working Paper, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC.
Canon, Maria, Marianna Kudlyak, and Yang Liu. 2015. “Youth
Labor Force Participation Continues to Fall, but It Might
Be for a Good Reason.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Regional Economist, January.
Canova, Fabio. 2004. “Testing for Convergence Clubs in Income
Per Capita: A Predictive Density Approach.” International
Economic Review 45 (1): 49–77.
Catão, Luis, and Gian M. Milesi-Ferretti. 2014. “External Liabilities and Crises.” Journal of International Economics (94) 18–32.
Catão, Luis, and Roberto Chang. 2017. “Financial Frictions and
Risk Sharing in Small Open Economies.” Unpublished.
Chami, Ralph, Dalia S. Hakura, and Peter Montiel. 2009.
“Remittances: An Automatic Output Stabilizer?” IMF Working
Paper 09/91, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Combes, Jean-Louis, and Christian Ebeke. 2011. “Remittances
and Household Consumption Instability in Developing
Countries.” World Development 39 (7): 1076–89.
Costinot, Arnaud, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2013. “Trade
Theory with Numbers: Quantifying the Consequences of
Globalization.” NBER Working Paper 18896, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Council of Economic Advisors. 2014. “The Labor Force Participation Rate since 2007: Causes and Policy Implications.”
Council of Economic Advisors, Washington, DC.
———. 2016. “The Long-Term Decline in Prime-Age Male
Labor Force Participation.” Council of Economic Advisors,
Washington, DC.
Daly, Mary C., Bart Hobijn, and Joseph Pedtke, 2017. “The
Good News on Wage Growth.” San Francisco Fed Blog,
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
De, Supriyo, Ergys Islamaj, Ayhan Kose, and S. Reza Yousefi.
2016. “Remittances over the Business Cycle: Theory and Evidence.” World Bank KNOMAD Working Paper 11, World
Bank, Washington, DC.
Desdoigts, Alain. 1999. “Patterns of Economic Development and the
Formation of Clubs.” Journal of Economic Growth 4 (3): 305–30.
Durlauf, Steven N., and Paul Johnson. 1995. “Multiple Regimes
and Cross-Country Growth Behavior.” Journal of Applied
Econometrics 10 (4): 365–84.
Durlauf, Steven N., and Danny T. Quah. 1999. “The New
Empirics of Economic Growth.” In Handbook of Macroeconomics (1A) edited by John Taylor and Michael Woodford.
Amsterdam, North-Holland.
Dvorkin, Maximiliano, and Hannah Shell. 2015. “A
Cross-Country Comparison of Labor Force Participation.”
Economic Synopses 17 (3–4).
Fajgelbaum, Pablo, and Amit Khandelwal. 2016. “Measuring the
Unequal Gains from Trade.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
131 (3): 1113–80.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Feyrer, James. 2007. “Demographics and Productivity.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 89 (1): 100–09.
Frankel, Jeffrey. 2011. “Are Bilateral Remittances Countercyclical?” Open Economies Review 22 (1):1–16.
Giuliano, Paola, and Marta Ruiz-Arranz. 2009. “Remittances,
Financial Development, and Growth.” Journal of Development
Economics 90 (1): 144–52.
Gruss, Bertrand. 2014. “After the Boom—Commodity Prices
and Economic Growth in Latin America and the Caribbean.”
IMF Working Paper 14/154, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Hadzi-Vaskov, Metodij. 2006. “Workers’ Remittances and
International Risk-Sharing.” Tjalling C. Koopmans
Research Institute Discussion Paper 06–19, University of Utrecht.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2013a. “Macroeconomic
Issues in Small States: Implications for Fund Engagement.”
Washington, DC.
———. 2013b. “Staff Guidance Note on the Application of
the Joint Bank-Fund Debt Sustainability Framework for
Low-Income Countries.” Washington, DC.
———. 2014. “Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment.” Chapter 3 of the
October World Economic Outlook, Washington, DC.
———. 2014. “Macroeconomic Developments in Low-​
Income Developing Countries.” IMF Policy Paper,
Washington, DC.
———. 2016a. “External Sector Report.” Washington, DC.
———. 2016b. “Small States’ Resilience to Natural Disasters
and Climate Change—Role of the IMF.” IMF Policy Paper,
Washington, DC.
———. 2017a. “Article IV Consultation with the United States
of America.” Concluding Statement of the IMF Mission,
Washington, DC.
———. 2017b. “External Adjustment to Terms-of-Trade Shifts.”
Chapter 3 of the Western Hemisphere Regional Economic Outlook. April, Washington, DC.
———. 2017c. “External Sector Report.” Washington, DC.
———. 2017d. Forthcoming. “G20 Report on Strong, Sustainable, and Balanced Growth.” Washington, DC.
———, World Bank, and World Trade Organization. 2017.
“Making Trade an Engine of Growth for All.” Policy Papers,
Washington, DC.
Jongwanich, Juthathip. 2007. “Workers’ Remittances, Economic Growth and Poverty in Developing Asia and the
Pacific Countries.” UNESCAP Working Paper 07/01, United
Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific, Bangkok.
Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Bent E. Sorensen, and Oved Yosha.
2003. “Risk Sharing and Industrial Specialization: Regional
and International Evidence.” American Economic Review 93
(3): 903–18.
Koepke, Robin. 2015. “What Drives Capital Flows to
Emerging Markets? A Survey of the Empirical Literature.”

Global Prospects and Policies

IIF Working Paper, Institute of International Finance,
Washington, DC.
Koopman, Robert, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2014. “Tracing Value-Added and Double Counting in Gross Exports.”
American Economic Review 104 (2): 459–94.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar S. Prasad, and Marco E. Terrones. 2009.
“Does Financial Globalization Promote Risk Sharing?” Journal of Development Economics 89 (2): 258–70.
Krause, Eleanor, and Isabel Sawhill. 2017. “What We Know and
Don’t Know about Declining Labor Force Participation: A
Review.” Center on Children and Families at Brookings, The
Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
Laeven, Luc, and Fabian Valencia. 2008. “Systemic Banking
Crises: A New Database.” IMF Working Paper 08/224, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
———. 2010. “Resolution of Banking Crises: The Good, the
Bad, and the Ugly.” IMF Working Paper 10/44, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
———. 2012. “Systemic Banking Crises Database: An Update.”
IMF Working Paper 12/163, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Lakner, Christoph, and Branko Milanovic. 2015. “Global
Income Distribution: From the Fall of the Berlin Wall
to the Great Recession.” World Bank Economic Review 30
(2): 203–32.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2017. “International Financial Integration in the Aftermath of the Global
Financial Crisis.” IMF Working Paper 17/115, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Lewis, Karen. 1996. “What Can Explain the Apparent Lack of
International Consumption Risk Sharing?” Journal of Political
Economy 104 (2): 267–97.
McCauley, Robert N., and Chang Shu. 2016. “Dollars and
Renminbi Flowed out of China.” Bank for International Settlements Quarterly Review, March 2016.
Obstfeld, Maurice. 1993. “Are Industrial-Country Consumption
Risks Globally Diversified?” NBER Working Paper 4308,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and M.
Ayhan Kose. 2003. “Effects of Financial Globalization on
Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence.” IMF
Occasional Paper 220, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Arvind Subramanian. 2005. “What
Undermines Aid’s Impact on Growth?” IMF Working Paper
05/126, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Ratha, Dilip. 2003. “Workers’ Remittances: An Important and
Stable Source of External Development Finance.” In Global
Development Finance 2003: Striving for Stability in Development Finance. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Sorensen, Bent, Yi-Tsung Wu, Oved Yosha, and Yu Zhu. 2005.
“Home Bias and International Risk Sharing: Twin Puzzles
Separated at Birth.” CEPR Discussion Paper 5113, Centre for
Economic Policy Research, London.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

71

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Wacziarg, Romain, and Karen Horn Welch. 2008. “Trade
Liberalization and Growth: New Evidence.” NBER Working Paper 10152, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.

72

Yi, Kei-Mu. 2003. “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth
in World Trade?” Journal of Political Economy 111 (1): 52–102.
———. 2010. “Can Multistage Production Explain the Home
Bias in Trade?” American Economic Review 100 (1): 364–93.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER

2

RECENT WAGE DYNAMICS IN ADVANCED ECONOMIES:
DRIVERS AND IMPLICATIONS

Nominal wage growth in most advanced economies
remains markedly lower than it was before the Great
Recession of 2008–09. This chapter finds that the bulk
of the wage slowdown can be explained by labor market
slack (both headline unemployment and underutilization of labor in the form of involuntary part-time
employment), inflation expectations, and trend productivity growth. While involuntary part-time employment
may have helped support labor force participation and
facilitated stronger engagement with the workplace
than the alternative of unemployment, it also appears
to have weakened wage growth. This is the case even
in economies where measured slack appears low (that
is, headline unemployment rates are now at, or below,
their averages in the years leading up to the recession).
Common factors—beyond slack, productivity, and price
inflation—have also exerted downward pressure on wages
in recent years, suggesting that the synchronized nature
of excess capacity across countries may have amplified its
effects. While accommodative policies can help lift demand
and lower headline unemployment rates, wage growth
may continue to remain subdued until involuntary
part-time employment diminishes or trend productivity
growth picks up. Inflation rates will also likely remain
low unless wage growth accelerates beyond productivity growth in a sustained manner. Assessing the true
degree of slack beyond measured headline unemployment
rates will be important when judging the appropriate
pace of exit from accommodative monetary policies.

Introduction
Close to a decade after the Great Recession of 2008–09,
nominal wage growth in most advanced economies
remains markedly lower than it was before the recession.
This is the case even in countries where unemployment
rates are now at, or even below, their averages in the
years leading up to the recession. In some instances,
recent wage dynamics may reflect a correction from
The authors of this chapter are Gee Hee Hong, Zsóka Kóczán,
Weicheng Lian, and Malhar Nabar (team leader), with support from
Benjamin Hilgenstock and Jungjin Lee.

unsustainably high wage growth prior to the Great
Recession. The pattern, however, is more widespread.
Nominal wage dynamics, in general, are related to
underlying changes in a “real” component—physical
output created by labor together with other inputs
into production—as well as inflation pressure in the
economy. Viewed through this lens, subdued nominal
wage growth is, in principle, consistent with a widely
recognized slowdown in labor productivity, which can
weigh on underlying real wage dynamics, and generally
low inflation across advanced economies.1
Subdued nominal wage growth has also generally
coincided with a reduction in hours per worker and,
in some cases, a higher rate of involuntary part-time
employment and an increased share of temporary
employment contracts. Headline unemployment
measures are therefore not as indicative of labor market
slack, given this increase in part-time employment and
temporary contracts. These developments may also
point to persistent changes in the nature of employment relationships between firms and workers in
response to technological change and remaining labor
market rigidities in some countries that deter employers from hiring on standard, full-time contracts.2
From a macroeconomic perspective, shedding light
on the forces shaping nominal wage developments
could inform the debate on the extent of slack in
the economy and the appropriate pace of exit from
accommodative monetary policies. As noted in Chapter 1, core inflation rates in most advanced economies
remain below targets and have not shown a steady
upswing even as growth has generally picked up over
the past year. With wages being the largest component of most firms’ production costs, the upswing in
wages in response to falling unemployment is the main
reason core inflation typically picks up as aggregate
demand strengthens and excess capacity in the econ1On the productivity slowdown, see Fernald (2014); Byrne, Fernald, and Reinsdorf (2016); and Adler and others (2017). On weak
inflation rates in advanced economies, see Chapter 3 of the October
2016 World Economic Outlook (WEO).
2See Bentolila and others (2012) for a discussion of labor market
rigidities and the use of temporary contracts.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

73

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

omy shrinks.3 Core inflation in advanced economies is
thus unlikely to recover in a sustained manner before
labor market tightening spurs higher wage inflation. In
sum, a better understanding of the forces that weigh
on wage growth is important for assessing the appropriate course of monetary policy.
Insights into the drivers of wage dynamics and the
role of part-time employment and temporary contracts
may also offer perspective on prospects for income
inequality and possible policy actions to address the
income security of workers with part-time jobs or
temporary contracts. The latter could include tackling
slack, supporting retraining and reskilling, addressing
remaining labor market and structural rigidities, and
ensuring fairness of treatment across employees under
various types of contracts.
Accordingly, the chapter addresses the following
main questions:
•• Drivers: How well do aggregate macroeconomic
factors such as labor market slack, inflation expectations, and trend labor productivity growth
account for nominal wage dynamics observed across
advanced economies since the Great Recession? How
has the evolving mix of full-time versus involuntary
part-time employment and open-ended versus temporary work contracts affected labor market slack
and hence wage dynamics?
•• Underlying changes: How have changes in firms’
incentives and constraints in recent years (for
example, related to changing expectations about
medium-term growth prospects, technology, and
global production processes) affected nominal wage
setting and part-time employment? What impact
have shifts in bargaining power (arising, for example, from changes in employment regulations,
unionization, and degree of import competition)
had on wages and part-time employment?
These are the main findings of the chapter:
•• Macroeconomic factors such as labor market slack
(both headline unemployment and underutilization of labor in the form of involuntary part-time
employment), inflation expectations, and trend
productivity growth can account for the bulk
of the variation in nominal wage growth at the
country level in recent years. The analysis also
3As noted in Chapter 1, the part of the wage-inflation weakening
attributable to lower productivity growth would not translate into
weaker price inflation, given that the changes would have no net
effect on cost pressures (proxied by unit labor costs).

74

suggests that common factors have been exerting
increasing downward pressure on wage inflation
in the aftermath of the global financial crisis and
especially during 2014–16. For a number of euro
area economies with large precrisis current account
deficits, this may reflect policy measures to slow
wage growth and improve competitiveness in the
aftermath of the global financial crisis and euro area
sovereign debt crisis.4 More broadly, the finding of
sizable common factors behind wage weakness could
indicate the growing effect on wage setting in any
given economy of labor market conditions in other
countries (in the context of stronger cross-border
economic integration). It could also point to the
role of broad-based and synchronized demand weakness across many countries and heightened concern
about job losses, which may have hindered wage
growth in the aftermath of the global financial crisis
and the euro area sovereign debt crisis.
•• The relative roles of labor market slack and productivity growth vary across countries. In economies
where unemployment rates are still appreciably
above their averages before the Great Recession,
conventional measures of labor market slack can
explain about half of the slowdown in nominal
wage growth since 2007, with involuntary part-time
employment acting as a further significant drag on
wages. Productivity growth is in turn relatively less
important because these economies had generally
lower productivity growth to begin with, and less
of a slowdown.
•• In economies where unemployment rates are below
their averages before the Great Recession, slow
productivity growth can account for most—about
two-thirds—of the slowdown in nominal wage
growth since 2007. However, even here, involuntary part-time employment appears to be weighing
on wage growth, suggesting greater slack in the
labor market than captured by headline unemployment rates.
•• Involuntary part-time employment has risen more
in countries where output is estimated to fall short
of its potential. Once the influence of slack is taken
into account, involuntary part-time employment has
increased more where medium-term growth expectations have fallen more, automation has progressed
faster, and the importance of services in the economy has increased.
4Also

see Kang and Shambaugh (2014).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

•• The analysis suggests that while accommodative
policies can help lift demand and lower headline
unemployment rates, wage growth may continue to
remain subdued until involuntary part-time employment diminishes or trend productivity growth picks
up. Inflation rates will also likely remain low unless
wage growth accelerates beyond productivity growth
in a sustained manner. Assessing the true degree
of slack beyond measured headline unemployment
rates will be important when judging the appropriate pace of exit from accommodative monetary policies.
The next section presents a primer on the determinants of wage growth to help set the stage for the
empirical analysis. The chapter then takes stock of
changes in the labor markets of advanced economies
over recent years. In subsequent sections, the forces
shaping nominal wage dynamics and employment
outcomes at the aggregate level are assessed. The
chapter concludes with a discussion of the main policy
implications to be drawn from the analysis.

Wage Determination—A Primer
Nominal wages are determined by the interaction
between labor demand and supply, which are both
subject to multiple, interrelated influences. It is useful
to categorize these as influences related to the business
cycle and forces that are slower moving (secular).
Over the business cycle, aggregate demand for
final output translates into labor demand. In the
expansionary phase, employers increase labor input
to meet rising final demand. Rising demand for labor
can result in a combination of more hours (including
overtime), a decline in involuntary part-time employment, and an increase in the number of employed
workers. Eventually, as demand continues to rise, the
pool of jobseekers (a combination of unemployed
plus currently employed workers who are searching
for more attractive employment) shrinks relative to
vacancies, and employers pay more to attract workers or to retain those on the payroll. To the extent
that nominal wages are indexed to consumer price
inflation and influenced by the expected path of inflation, rising price pressures in the expansionary phase
of the cycle can also boost average nominal wage
growth. The opposite happens when final demand
weakens and the business cycle turns. Firms may
initially hoard labor and, once the slump deepens,

lay off workers. Average wage growth would then
also weaken, and weakening inflation pressure would
transmit back to weaker nominal wage growth. Thus,
two key cyclical factors associated with wages are
the degree of slack in the economy and inflation
expectations.
During the past decade—with a deep and prolonged recession, and fewer and fewer workers working
full-time—other dimensions of labor underutilization
beyond the standard slack measure of the unemployment rate also appear to have had a bearing on wages.5
Recent studies have found, for example, evidence of
a negative impact of discouraged workers, or a rising
share of part-time employment, on wages (Blanchflower and Posen 2014; Smith 2014).6
In addition to the business cycle, a key force shaping average wage growth is trend labor productivity
growth—increases in the output produced by each
hour of labor input in combination with other factors
of production. From a firm’s perspective, as trend labor
productivity growth accelerates, the value of hiring additional workers increases relative to the cost of expanding
the payroll.7 Greater demand for labor translates into
rising vacancies relative to jobseekers, and therefore
rising pressure on wages. Conversely, as productivity
growth weakens, all else equal, profitability declines,
along with firms’ ability to accommodate wage increases
for their existing workers or their willingness to attract
new workers with high wages. Thus, wage growth tends
to weaken as productivity growth slows. Wage rigidities
5See

Trigari (2014).
and Higgins (2014) note the negative impact on wages of
people working part-time for economic reasons. Other studies look
at whether the long-term unemployed affect wage dynamics as much
as the short-term unemployed (Stock 2011; Gordon 2013; Council
of Economic Advisers 2014; Krueger, Cramer, and Cho 2014;
Rudebusch and Williams 2014; Watson 2014), partly motivated
by the fact that both price and wage inflation rates in the early
aftermath of the Great Recession appeared more robust than would
be predicted based on conventional price and wage Phillips curves.
These studies have generally noted a greater impact of short-term
than of long-term unemployment. Others have noted, however, that
in the United States, for example, the long- and short-term unemployment rates evolved closely together in the few decades preceding
the Great Recession, and hence it can be difficult to disentangle their
impacts (Kiley 2014; Smith 2014).
7The acceleration in labor productivity growth can occur through
a combination of capital deepening (or an increase in the machinery
and equipment each worker operates), improvements in human capital and the average skill composition of the workforce, and a faster
pace of technology diffusion that complements the skills of a typical
worker. The effects on particular types of workers may vary, depending on the complementarity of technological change with their skills
and the tasks they perform, as discussed further below.
6Altig

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

75

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

(Hall 2005; Taylor 2016) mean that changes in labor
productivity may not translate one-for-one into wages
immediately; wage growth is thus linked more to the
trend of productivity growth (Dew-Becker and Gordon
2005; Yellen 2005).8,9
As long as workers are able to bargain for a stable
share of the economy’s value added, wage growth is
generally in line with trend labor productivity growth
(Mortensen and Pissarides 1999; Hall 2005). But
the strength of the association may waver.10 When
workers’ bargaining power improves over the medium
term, more trend productivity growth increments are
transmitted to wage growth.
Workers’ bargaining power is a function of interrelated drivers.11 These include institutional factors,
such as union density, the coverage of collective
bargaining agreements, and the degree of centralization of such agreements (for example, sectoral versus
firm-level). Labor laws and employment regulations
that circumscribe firms’ flexibility in laying off workers
can have an impact on hiring, wage setting, and terms
of employment.12
As mentioned earlier, technological changes can
also have varying impacts on bargaining power,
depending on the complementarity between new
technologies and the mix of tasks performed on the
job and workers’ skills. At one extreme, automation
can substitute for some low- or middle-skilled workers whose jobs mostly call for routine inputs implemented under precise instructions (Autor and Dorn
2013; Goos, Manning, and Salomons 2014). This
8A

one-for-one relationship between real wages and average labor
productivity over the long term would require an elasticity of substitution between capital and labor of one. The elasticity of substitution
between capital and labor is important in determining how the labor
share in national income responds to changes in the relative costs of
labor and capital.
9Of course, this link between wages and productivity may
not strictly hold at the sectoral level (as illustrated by the
Balassa-Samuelson effect).
10During the two decades before the Great Recession, for
example, the share of value added going to workers had been
trending down across advanced economies (Chapter 3 of the
April 2017 WEO).
11The interrelated nature of these drivers is examined, for example,
by Kramarz (2017), who studies the relationship between union
strength, offshoring, wages, and employment.
12Previous studies show that deregulation of the labor market
may temporarily cause an increase in unemployment, but eventually translate into long-term welfare gains (Blanchard and Giavazzi
2003). Chapter 3 of the April 2016 WEO and OECD (2017) show
that labor market deregulation has positive effects on employment
and output in good times, but can become contractionary in periods of slack.

76

would weaken the bargaining power of such workers
and lead to less attractive terms of employment, possibly in lower-skill occupations (for example, weaker
wage growth, fewer hours, or an increase in the share
of part-time employment). At the other extreme,
advances in design technology can be highly complementary for high-skilled workers, such as engineers
and architects whose jobs call for complex problem
solving, boosting their productivity and ability to
command higher wages. Workers’ bargaining power
can also be influenced by exposure to international
competition. This may arise through trade and firms’
participation in global supply chains, but it could
also stem from the threat of production facilities
relocating to economies where costs overall are lower.
Automation and increased competition can in turn
weaken unionization.
From a firm’s perspective, uncertainty about growth
over the medium term can also influence hiring
decisions and the resulting wage dynamics. At times of
greater optimism and certainty about future revenue,
firms may be more willing to hire full-time workers,
create jobs with open-ended contracts, and pay better
wages to retain workers or improve the quality of the
match in the labor market. During times of diminished growth expectations, perceptions of downside
risks, or uncertainty about the future, firms may be
less willing to lock themselves into potentially costly
employment arrangements and prefer instead to hire
labor part time, or on temporary contracts, with less
favorable wages and benefits. Such growth expectations
could incorporate both demand and supply components, including future demand and expected productivity growth.
The next section examines the evolution of key labor
market indicators in recent years.

Advanced Economy Labor Markets:
Surface Healing Masks Deeper Changes
Headline Employment and Wages
Employment
As shown in panel 1 of Figure 2.1, unemployment
rates have been generally declining since 2013, but
remain elevated in about three-quarters of advanced
economies relative to their 2007 levels. These declines
are mostly reflective of job creation, not artifacts of
working-age members of the population dropping out
of the labor force. In fact, as panel 2 of Figure 2.1

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

Figure 2.1. Distribution of Labor Market Indicators
(Percentage-point difference relative to 2007)

Unemployment rates have been generally declining since 2013 but remain
elevated in about three-quarters of advanced economies relative to their 2007
levels. These declines are mostly reﬂective of job creation and not a result of
working-age members of the population dropping out of the labor force. In fact,
labor force participation has risen in more than half of advanced economies.

12

1. Unemployment Rate

10
8
6

Wages

4
2
0
–2
–4

4

2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
2. Labor Force Participation Rate

3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5

4

shows, labor force participation has risen in more than
half of advanced economies relative to 2007 levels,
generally reflecting higher participation by workers
older than 54 and women in these countries (analyzed
in detail in Box 1.1).13,14 Higher unemployment rates,
combined with higher labor force participation rates,
leave employment ratios (employed workers as a share
of the age 15+ population) very close to or above their
pre–Great Recession peak (2007) in about half of
advanced economies.15

2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

Panel 1 of Figure 2.2 shows that for virtually all
advanced economies, nominal wage growth (measured
as nominal compensation per hour, and comparable
across countries) remains below pre–Great Recession
ranges.16 This is particularly notable for economies
where unemployment rates have declined relatively
rapidly and are now close to or below pre–Great
Recession averages (Figure 2.2, panel 2). Even in
economies where nominal wage growth in 2016 was
higher than before the Great Recession, such as Germany and Japan, the gains have been from low bases:
a period of wage moderation in Germany intensified
by the Hartz labor market reforms and in the midst
of Japan’s decade-long deflation and shrinking nominal wages.17

3. Total Employment, Share of Population

2
0
–2
–4
–6
–8

2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: The horizontal line inside each box represents the median, the upper and
lower edges of the box show the top and bottom quartiles, and the red markers
denote the top and bottom deciles.

13As noted in Box 1.1, the decline in the population-weighted
average labor force participation rate in advanced economies since
2007 is driven by a large decline in the United States.
14As highlighted in Chapter 1 of the October 2015 and October
2016 WEO, forecasts in the postcrisis period have generally underpredicted employment growth.
15The United States is a notable exception, where a decline of 3
percentage points in the participation rate since 2007 has resulted in
a lower employment ratio than before the crisis, despite the decline
in the unemployment rate to below its precrisis average.
16Growth rates for real wages in about three-quarters of advanced
economies are below what they were before the Great Recession, whether viewed as “consumption real wages” (that is, nominal
wages deflated by headline consumer price inflation, which influences living standards and labor supply decisions) or as “product real
wages” (that is, nominal wages deflated by the GDP deflator, which
influences firms’ profitability and hiring decisions). See Annex 2.1
for more details on the wage measures and Annex Figure 2.2.1 on
the dynamics of real wages.
17See Burda and Seele (2016) for a discussion of the effects of the
Hartz reforms on the German labor market and Aoyagi and Ganelli
(2015) on Japan’s labor market outcomes during the 2000s.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

77

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 2.2. Distribution of Nominal Wage Growth and
Correlation with Changes in the Unemployment Rate
Despite improved headline employment indicators, nominal wages in virtually all
advanced economies are growing at a slower pace than before the Great
Recession. This is particularly notable for economies where unemployment rates
are now close to or below pre-Great Recession averages.
8 1. Nominal Wage Growth
(Percentage-point difference relative to 2007)
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
–8

2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

4
Growth of nominal
compensation per hour

Temporary Contracts

2. Nominal Wage Growth and Unemployment Rate1
(Percentage points)

6
2

ISR DEU

0
–4

SVK

–8
–10
–10

CZE

ISL
AUS

CAN
USA
KOR
GBR

–2
–6

JPN

FRA

ESP

ITA
GRC

EST

–5
0
5
Change in unemployment rate

10

15

Sources: Eurostat; national authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The sample in panel 1 excludes Baltic countries. The wage variable used is
compensation per hour of workers excluding the self-employed. The horizontal line
inside each box represents the median, the upper and lower edges of the box
show the top and bottom quartiles, and the red markers denote the top and bottom
deciles. Data labels in panel 2 use International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) country codes. Outliers and the 10 largest advanced economies (by 2016
nominal GDP in US dollars) are labeled.
1
Changes shown are 2016 values relative to the 2000–07 average.

Involuntary Part-Time Employment, Temporary
Contracts, Hours
A more complete picture of the labor market
emerges by considering additional indicators that suggest greater slack in the labor market than captured by
headline unemployment rates, and possibly weaker job
security than prior to the Great Recession.
Involuntary Part-Time Employment
Panel 1 of Figure 2.3 documents that involuntary
part-time employment (workers employed fewer than 30
hours a week who report they would like longer hours)
78

increased across virtually the entire sample in 2009 and
remains above the 2007 level in more than three-quarters
of countries. In the United States, the share increased
from 0.8 percent in 2007 to 1.3 percent in 2016,
while in the United Kingdom it rose from 2.4 percent to 3.9 percent, and in France from 5.3 percent to
7.8 percent. Germany is an exception, although its 2016
involuntary part-time employment share (3.1 percent)
was above the 2.7 percent average for 2000–07.
As panel 2 of Figure 2.3 shows, the largest increases
in involuntary part-time employment occurred in economies with unemployment rates above their 2000–07
averages. But even for economies with rates now close
to their 2000–07 averages (points clustered around the
vertical axis), the involuntary part-time share of employment is higher than it was before the crisis.

Along with involuntary part-time employment,
the incidence of temporary contractual arrangements
has attracted attention in recent years (see Aoyagi and
Ganelli 2015; Brainard 2016). These contracts can
help reduce unemployment spells, allow workers to
avoid gaps in their employment history, and maintain
their engagement in the labor force. However, they
typically offer briefer employment than do open-ended
contracts, less opportunity for workers to develop skills
and expand responsibilities, and sometimes weaker
benefits. By 2016, in just over half the economies,
the temporary contract share was higher than in 2007
(Figure 2.4, panel 1). Temporary contracts are more
common now than in 2000–07 for most advanced
economies (Figure 2.4, panel 2).18
Hours
A third category of job attributes, which in part
reflects worker preferences, is hours worked per worker.
In more than half of the economies, hours per worker
are at least 2 percent below 2007 levels (Figure 2.5,
panel 1). However, hours had been declining before
that, and the pattern has continued.19
18In the case of Japan, the figure shows that the share of temporary
contract workers has dropped by close to 6 percentage points compared
with the 2000–07 average. But as noted in IMF (2016), the wider
category of “nonregular” workers—those who either (1) are not hired
directly by the employer, (2) work part-time, or (3) do not have an
open-ended contract—actually increased as a share of overall employment during this period. See also Aoyagi and Ganelli (2015). There are
no comparable cross-country data on regular versus nonregular workers.
19The measure may understate the decline in hours per job if an
individual now accumulates hours across multiple jobs more often
than in the past.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

Figure 2.3. Job Attributes: Involuntary Part-Time
Employment

Figure 2.4. Job Attributes: Temporary Contracts

Involuntary part-time employment shares increased across virtually the entire
sample in 2009 and remain above the 2007 level in more than three-quarters of
the economies. The largest increases occurred in economies with unemployment
rates above their 2000–07 averages.
6 1. Involuntary Part-Time Employment, Share of Total Employment
(Percentage-point difference relative to 2007)
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

4 1. Share of Temporary Contracts
(Percentage-point difference relative to 2007)
2
0
–2
–4
–6
–8
–10

2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

1

10

2. Involuntary Part-Time Employment and Unemployment
(Percentage points)
ITA
ESP
GRC
IRL

8
6
4

FRA

SVK

2
CZE

0
–2

ISR

–4
–10

DEU LTU
–5

EST
JPN

NLD

Change in share of
temporary contracts

Change in involuntary
part-time employment share

The temporary contract share in 2016 is above its 2007 level in over half of
advanced economies. Temporary contracts are more common now than in 2000–
07, primarily in economies where the unemployment rate remains above its
pre-Great Recession average.

PRT

0
–2
–4

NOR
BEL

0
5
Change in unemployment rate

8 2. Temporary Contracts and Unemployment1
(Percentage points)
6
DNK LUX PRT
4 SVK
FRA
NLD ITA
CHE
2
DEU
IRL

–6
–10
10

15

Sources: National authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Involuntary part-time workers are those working less than 30 hours a week
because they could not ﬁnd a full-time position. The involuntary part-time
employment share is calculated as the total number of involuntary part-time
workers divided by total employment. In panel 1, the horizontal line inside each
box represents the median, the upper and lower edges of the box show the top and
bottom quartiles, and the red markers denote the top and bottom deciles. In panel
2, countries in gold are those with decreases in the involuntary part-time
employment share; countries in red are those with pronounced increases. Data
labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country
codes.
1
Changes shown are 2016 values relative to the 2000–07 average.

The decline in hours could reflect worker preferences
for greater flexibility and willingness to work fewer
hours (for example for elderly workers or students who
previously may not have been in the labor force). But
it could also reflect firms’ preference for hiring workers for fewer hours or on an as-needed basis. These
just-in-time matches are often governed by agreements
between firms and workers. The firm need not guarantee minimum hours, and workers are not obligated
to accept an offer made by the firm. These contracts

GBR
KOR
LTU

NOR

LVA

ESP

JPN
–5

0
5
Change in unemployment rate

10

15

Sources: National authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Temporary workers are those with work contracts of limited duration;
thresholds are country speciﬁc. The share of temporary contracts is calculated as
the number of temporary workers divided by total employment. In panel 1, the
horizontal line inside each box represents the median, the upper and lower edges of
the box show the top and bottom quartiles, and the red markers denote the top and
bottom deciles. In panel 2, countries in gold are those with decreases in the share
of temporary contracts; countries in red are those with pronounced increases. Data
labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country
codes.
1
Changes shown are 2016 values relative to the 2000–07 average.

are referred to as “zero-hours contracts” in the United
Kingdom; similar agreements govern employment
relationships elsewhere, including in Australia and
Canada.20 As Box 2.1 documents, hours declined more
in sectors with higher shares of low- and middle-skilled
workers, suggesting that factors beyond worker pref20In the United Kingdom for example, workers on zero-hours
contracts as a share of employed workers rose from 0.6 percent in
2010 to 3 percent in 2016 (Haldane 2017).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

79

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 2.5. Job Attributes: Hours per Worker
In more than half of advanced economies in 2016, hours per worker were at least
2 percent below 2007 levels. However, this appears to be a continuation of the
pre-2007 pattern. Hours per worker have fallen from their 2000–07 averages,
regardless of whether unemployment rates are now higher or lower than before
the Great Recession. Declining hours also tend to be associated with higher shares
of involuntary part-time employment.

8 1. Hours per Worker
(Log level difference relative to 2007)
6
4
2
0
–2
–4

Separating Compositional Shifts from Common Patterns
across Sectors

–6
–8
–10

2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
1

4 2. Hours per Worker and Unemployment
2
LTU
SWE
0
–2
ISR
SVN
JPN
–4
CHE
ITA
DEU
–6
ISL
EST
–8
IRL
–10
AUT
–12
KOR
–14
–16
–10
–5
0
5
10
Change in unemployment rate (percentage points)

Average change in log
(hours per worker)

Change in log (hours per worker)

erences were at play. A concurrent rise in involuntary
part-time employment also suggests that the decline in
hours per worker was driven by reduced demand for
hours of work by firms, rather than reduced supply of
hours by workers. However, it is still difficult to separate workers’ preferences that shape labor supply from
the binding constraints of weak labor demand.
Hours per worker have fallen from their 2000–07
averages, regardless of whether unemployment rates are
higher or lower than they were (Figure 2.5, panel 2).
Declining hours also tend to be associated with higher
shares of involuntary part-time employment (panel 3).

15

0.4 3. Involuntary Part-Time Employment and Hours per Worker,
2009–16
0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.8
–1.0
–1.2
–0.4

–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Average change in involuntary part-time
employment share (percentage points)

0.8

1.0

Sources: National authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 1, the horizontal line inside each box represents the median, the
upper and lower edges of the box show the top and bottom quartiles, and the red
markers denote the top and bottom deciles. In panel 2, countries in gold are those
with increases in hours per worker; countries in red are those with pronounced
decreases. In panel 3, countries in red display (on average) falling hours per
worker and (on average) an increase in the involuntary part-time employment
share for 2009–16. Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) country codes.
1
Changes shown are 2016 values relative to the 2000–07 average.

80

The previous sections point to a widespread change
in labor market outcomes (subdued wage growth,
larger involuntary part-time employment, higher
incidence of temporary contracts, declining hours per
worker) compared with the period before the Great
Recession. To what extent do these developments
mostly reflect common patterns across sectors, or
compositional shifts in employment toward sectors
where the change in labor market outcomes is more
pronounced? Data for 21 sectors across 31 advanced
economies since 2000 allow for a deeper look at the
underlying role of compositional effects.
Figures 2.6 and 2.7 compare the average change in a
job attribute during 2009–16 with the imputed change
if employment shares across sectors had remained as
they were in 2008. Points on the 45-degree line indicate that the actual change and the imputed change are
identical; it is therefore within-sector developments,
rather than compositional change across sectors, that
drive aggregate dynamics. Conversely, points off the
45-degree line indicate that compositional change
contributed to the overall development. Points marked
in red are those for which the indicator deteriorated
during 2009–16 and compositional change in sectoral
employment shares made a quantitatively important contribution to that decline (that is, a shift in
employment toward sectors where the deterioration
was deeper). The figures indicate that compositional
changes seem to play greater roles for part-time
employment shares, temporary contracts, and hours
per worker than for growth in nominal wages.21
21Labor

mobility across sectors could cause wage growth to be
broadly synchronized across sectors such that aggregate wage developments appear to reflect mostly within-sector developments.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

Figure 2.6. Average Nominal Wage Growth, 2009–16, Actual
versus Imputed Using 2008 Sectoral Employment Shares

Figure 2.7. Changes in Labor Market Indicators, Actual
versus Imputed Using 2008 Sectoral Employment Shares

Compositional changes do not appear to have an important role in recent nominal
wage growth dynamics. All advanced economies are close to the 45-degree line,
indicating that aggregate wage growth is driven by within-sector developments.

Compositional change played an important role for changes in job attributes.
Shifts in employment shares across sectors can explain about 22 percent of the
increase in the part-time employment share, 18 percent of the increase in the
share of temporary contracts, and 23 percent of the reduction in hours per
worker.

(Percent)

4.5

1. Average Change in Part-Time Employment Share, 2009–16
AUT
(Percentage points)
CHE
ITA
SVK
IRL
ESP AUS
EST
DNK
ISL
MLT
LVA
NLD DEU BEL
FIN
USA GBR
CZE FRA
CAN
LUX

0.75

4.0

0.50

3.5

Actual

3.0

Actual

2.5

0.25
0.00

2.0
1.5

LTU

–0.25
–0.25

1.0

0.00
0.25
0.50
Imputed using 2008 employment shares

0.75

0.5

0.75

0.0

0.50
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Imputed using 2008 employment shares

4.0

4.5

Sources: Eurostat; national authorities; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The wage variable used is annual wage per worker excluding the selfemployed.

Actual

0.0

0.25

Panels 1 and 2 of Figure 2.8 show that, during
2008–16, declining employment shares in sectors with
low part-time employment and temporary contracts
(mining and manufacturing), together with faster
increases in employment in sectors with higher shares

PRT BEL
MLT
CAN

0.00

–0.50
–0.50

•• In the case of part-time employment, 26 countries
in the sample experienced an increased share of
part-time workers. In 12 of the 26 countries, compositional change accounted for more than 25 percent of the increase (and more than half the increase
in four countries).
•• Regarding the temporary contract share of employment, 19 of the 26 countries experienced an
increase. Compositional change accounted for more
than 25 percent of the increase in seven of those
countries (and more than half in three countries).
•• Declines in hours per worker were seen in 25
countries, with compositional change accounting for
more than 25 percent of this decrease in 10 countries (and more than half in five countries).

NLD
SWE

AUT

–0.25

0.50

0.00
–0.25
–0.50
–0.75
–0.75

GBR

–0.25
0.00
0.25
Imputed using 2008 employment shares

0.50

0.75

3. Average Change in Hours per Worker, 2009–16
(Log level difference)

0.25
Actual

–0.5
–0.5

2. Average Change in Share of Temporary Contracts, 2009–16
SVK
(Percentage points)
DNK
CZE ISL LUX
ITA

JPN
LTU
IRL
EST SVK
GBR
DEU
SVN
LVA
CAN MLT CHE
CZE
ITA FIN
AUS
ESP ISL DNK
AUT

–0.50
–0.25
0.00
Imputed using 2008 employment shares

0.25

0.50

Sources: Eurostat; national authorities; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The part-time employment share is calculated as the number of part-time
workers in a sector divided by total employment in the sector. Temporary workers
are people with work contracts of limited duration; thresholds are country
speciﬁc. The share of temporary contracts is calculated as the number of
temporary workers in a sector divided by total employment in the sector.
Countries in red represent cases in which compositional changes ampliﬁed
within-sector increases (panels 1 and 2) or decreases (panel 3). Data labels in the
ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

81

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 2.8. Job Attributes and Changes in Sectoral
Employment Shares, 2008–16
Compositional shifts in employment toward sectors with relatively high shares of
part-time employment and temporary employment and relatively low hours per
worker contributed to the overall changes in these job attributes.
1. Part-Time Employment

Change in employment share
(percentage points)

6
4

0
–2

TRA
ELC
MNG

REA

EDU

PUB

ADM

ART

ACC

OTH

TRD
AGR

50
75
100
125
150
Average part-time employment share relative to country mean

175

2. Temporary Contracts

6
Change in employment share
(percentage points)

MNF

WAT
FIN

CON

–4
25

Drivers of Recent Wage Dynamics

4
PRF
2
0

FIN
MNG

–2
–4
50

REA

TRA

HEA
INF

OTH

ART

ADM
WAT

EDU

ACC

ELC TRD PUB
CON
MNF
AGR

75
100
125
150
175
Average share of temporary contracts relative to country mean

200

3. Hours per Worker

6
Change in employment share
(percentage points)

HEA

PRF
INF

2

of these attributes (services), contributed to rising
overall shares of part-time employment and temporary
contracts. Panel 3 of Figure 2.8 shows that shifts in
employment toward sectors with relatively low hours
per worker contributed to the aggregate change in this
job attribute.
In sum, sectors that tend to have traditional
employment arrangements (smaller shares of temporary
contracts and part-time employment, longer hours per
worker) have seen outright declines or weaker growth
in employment than sectors where arrangements are
more flexible. All in all, shifts in employment shares
across sectors can explain about 22 percent of the
increase in part-time employment, 18 percent of the
increase in temporary contracts, and 23 percent of the
reduction in hours per worker.

4
ART HEA ADM
PRF
ACC REA
INF
EDU
WAT
OTH
TRA
TRD PUB FIN
MNG
ELC

2
0
–2

MNF

–4
80

CON

90
100
110
Average hours per worker relative to country mean

AGR

120

Sources: Eurostat; national authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Markers to the right of 100 represent sectors with relatively high values
(relative to country mean); markers to the left of 100 represent sectors with
relatively low values. ACC = accommodation and food service activities; ADM =
administrative and support service activities; AGR = agriculture, forestry, and
ﬁshing; ART = arts, entertainment, and recreation; CON = construction; EDU =
education; ELC = electricity, gas, steam, and air-conditioning supply; FIN =
ﬁnancial and insurance activities; HEA = human health and social work activities;
INF = information and communication; MNF = manufacturing; MNG = mining and
quarrying; OTH = other services; PRF = professional, scientiﬁc, and technical
activities; PUB = public administration and defense; REA = real estate activities;
TRA = transportation and storage; TRD = wholesale and retail trade; WAT = water
supply, sewerage, waste management, and remediation activities.

As documented in the section “Surface Healing Masks Deeper Changes,” nominal wage growth
remains lower than before the Great Recession in most
advanced economies. Furthermore, rising involuntary
part-time employment, a higher incidence of temporary contracts, and a decline in hours per worker
suggest broader changes in the labor market in many
advanced economies since 2007, and notably even in
those where unemployment rates are now below their
precrisis averages.
This section studies the determinants of wage
growth across advanced economies in recent years. The
empirical approach is guided by the sequence outlined
in the primer on wage determination. It first explores
the role of cyclical factors, such as headline unemployment and inflation expectations and medium-term
factors (trend productivity growth), before examining how the changing nature of employment affects
wage dynamics. Finally, it explores the influence of
slower-moving factors on wage dynamics and involuntary part-time employment.

Aggregate Analysis—Cross-Country Evidence
The baseline approach is a panel variant of the wage
Phillips curve estimated in Gali (2011), in which
wage growth is regressed on expected inflation, lagged
inflation, and the unemployment rate.22 The analysis
22The baseline wage measure is compensation per hour, excluding
self-employment income. Because the data are insufficient to accu-

82

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

focuses on nominal wage growth, examining the influence of past inflation and inflation expectations explicitly, alongside drivers that could be acting through real
wage dynamics.
These cyclical drivers can be rationalized as follows.
Nominal wage growth depends on expected inflation
(if wage setting is forward looking) or on lagged
inflation (if backward indexation occurs); in aggregate, it is likely to depend on a combination of the
two. Given that the benchmark model assumes a
constant natural rate of unemployment and constant
hours per worker, the unemployment rate proxies
for labor market slack. In other models (described
in Annexes 2.2 and 2.3), the output gap is used as
an alternative measure of labor market slack. Greater
slack in the labor market is expected to slow wage
growth. Furthermore, at any given labor market slack
and inflation expectations, wage growth can vary,
depending on whether the economy is entering or
exiting recession. The wage Phillips curves therefore
also control for changes in unemployment (Manning
1993; Gali 2011). As described in the primer on
wage determination, a key influence on wage growth
is trend labor productivity growth. The benchmark
model controls for this factor as well.23
The panel structure allows for the examination of
wage dynamics across advanced economies, exploiting
variation in the determinants of wage growth over time
and across countries. Robustness tests are conducted
by allowing the relationships between wage growth
and labor market slack, changes in the unemployment
rate, and inflation expectations to be country specific.
Allowing coefficients to be country specific can help
capture particular features of individual contexts—for
instance, the hypothesis that nominal wage growth
in the United States has been subdued in recent years
rately determine the shares of value added captured by labor versus
capital for the self-employed, the baseline measure does not consider
the wages of the self-employed. Results are broadly robust to using
alternative wage measures.
23The inclusion of trend productivity growth in wage equations
that examine the role of cyclical factors, such as slack and inflation
expectations, is argued for by Ball and Moffitt (2001), Dew-Becker
and Gordon (2005), Hall (2005), and Yellen (2005). The theoretical
motivation for including productivity growth in wage Phillips curves
is shown, for example, in Blanchard and Katz (1997), although the
authors note that the empirical estimates for US Phillips curves
estimated up to the time of writing do not strongly argue for its
inclusion in the specification. The pass-through from labor productivity to real wages depends on the bargaining power of workers and
the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor (Chapter 3 of
the April 2017 WEO). Annex Figure 2.2.3 illustrates the dynamics
of trend productivity growth.

in part because employers did not cut wages immediately after the financial crisis (Yellen 2014; Daly
and Hobijn 2015), or the idea that wage growth
may have been inhibited by a decline in the entry of
new firms, a reduction in labor market “churn,” and
fewer job-to-job transitions—and thus fewer discrete
increases in wages that often occur with these transitions.24 While testing these country-specific hypotheses
in detail is beyond the scope of this chapter, two boxes
supplement the cross-country analysis by shedding
light on particular mechanisms that apply in certain
advanced economy contexts. Box 2.2 examines the
incidence of nominal wage freezes and cuts using
firm-level data from Europe. Box 2.3 studies how wage
growth in a broad sample of advanced economies may
have been affected by firm-level balance sheet health
after the financial crisis.
Slack and Inflation
The analysis indicates that slack and past inflation
are statistically significantly associated with nominal
wage growth, with expected signs (Annex Table 2.3.1,
column 1). A 1 percentage point increase in the
unemployment rate is associated with a 0.3 to 0.4 percentage point decline in nominal wage growth, while a
1 percentage point increase in lagged inflation is associated with a 0.2 percentage point increase in nominal
wage growth.
Trend Labor Productivity Growth
Firms’ profitability and ability to accommodate
wage increases are linked to changes in trend labor
productivity growth, as discussed in the primer on
wage determination. The empirical evidence suggests that nominal wage growth indeed appears to
move broadly in line with trend productivity growth
(Annex Table 2.3.1, column 2). A 1 percentage point
increase in trend productivity growth is associated
with a 0.7 percentage point increase in nominal wage
growth.25
24Danninger (2016), for example, finds that job-to-job transitions
in the United States have slowed for all skill and age groups in recent
years. These developments are not necessarily a legacy of the Great
Recession. Davis and Haltiwanger (2014) show that worker reallocation rates declined by 25 percent after 2000, suggesting that the
labor market had begun to turn less fluid before the Great Recession.
25The impact of trend productivity growth on wage growth is
consistent with other studies. These results suggest that a 1 percentage point increase in trend productivity growth rate is associated
with 0.4 to 0.9 percentage point higher wage growth, a range
that includes the impact of about 0.8 percentage point implied in

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

83

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 2.9. Effects on Growth of Compensation per Hour:
Panel Estimation

Figure 2.10. Effects on Growth of Compensation per Hour:
Country-by-Country Estimation, Cross-Country Dispersion

Slack, past inﬂation, and trend labor productivity growth are statistically
signiﬁcantly associated with nominal wage growth, with expected signs.

A country-by-country exploration of the inﬂuences of slack, past inﬂation, and
trend labor productivity growth points to country-speciﬁc estimates that are
broadly consistent with the coefﬁcients obtained from the country panel
estimation.

(Percentage points)

1.0

(Percentage points)

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.5
0.0

0.0

–0.5
–0.5

Unemployment
rate

Change in
unemployment
rate

Lagged inﬂation

Trend labor
productivity
growth

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The wage variable used is compensation per hour of workers excluding the
self-employed. Markers show estimated coefﬁcients, and lines display 90 percent
conﬁdence intervals. Sample excludes Baltic countries. Oil price is used as an
instrument for lagged inﬂation. Figure is based on column (7) of Annex Table
2.3.1.

Similar patterns emerge through approaches that
attempt to reduce concerns about reverse causality
from wage growth to inflation (Annex Table 2.3.1,
column 3) and by focusing on a sample that excludes
smaller advanced economies to ensure that they are
not driving the results (Annex Table 2.3.1, columns
5–7). Figure 2.9 shows coefficient estimates for the
preferred specification, based on the sample excluding
the smaller economies and using instrumental variables to account for possible endogeneity of inflation
in the wage equation (Annex Table 2.3.1, column 7).
Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014). A coefficient smaller than 1
implies a less than one-for-one association between increments to
productivity growth and wage growth, and indicates that some of the
gains from higher productivity growth translate into higher capital
income (including rent, interest, dividends and retained corporate
earnings). See Chapter 3 of the April 2017 WEO for a more extensive discussion.

84

–1.0

Unemployment
rate

Change in
unemployment
rate

Lagged inﬂation

Trend labor
productivity
growth

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The wage variable used is compensation per hour of workers excluding the
self-employed. Markers show means of country-by-country estimation
coefﬁcients, and lines display corresponding interquartile ranges. Sample
excludes Baltic countries. Figure is based on column (8) of Annex Table 2.3.1.

Furthermore, a country-by-country exploration of
the influences of slack, past inflation, and trend
productivity growth illustrates that the underlying
dispersion of country-specific estimates (Figure 2.10;
Annex Table 2.3.1, columns 4 and 8) is broadly
consistent with the coefficients obtained from the
cross-country panel.26
The findings also hold when using the aggregate
output gap as a measure of slack (which allows for
changes over time in the natural rate of unemployment
and cyclical variations in hours per worker), as well as
alternative measures of inflation expectations and trend
productivity growth (Annex Table 2.3.2).

26The coefficients from the country-by-country specifications are,
however, less precisely estimated than the panel coefficients due to
smaller samples.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

The Changing Nature of Employment and
Latent Slack

previously. Across all countries, on average, a 1 percentage point increase in the involuntary part-time
employment share is associated with a 0.3 percentage
point decline in nominal wage growth. To allow for the
possibility that coefficients might vary across countries
that have had different degrees of labor market tightening since the crisis, the regressions are also estimated
separately for three subgroups. The coefficient is larger
for the sample of countries where the unemployment
rate is below pre–Great Recession averages. Within
this group of countries, a 1 percentage point increase
in the involuntary part-time employment share is
associated with a 0.7 percentage point decline in wage
growth. The estimated effect is only 0.2 percentage
point for countries with unemployment appreciably
above the pre–Great Recession averages. Though the
point estimates are different for these subsamples, these
differences are not statistically significant (Figure 2.11
depicts the coefficients shown in Annex Table 2.3.3,
columns 5–8).
In contrast to the finding that involuntary part-time
employment has weighed on nominal wage growth,
the analysis does not detect a role for temporary
contracts in affecting wage dynamics. In general, the
temporary contract share of employment does not have
a statistically significant effect on aggregate wages for
the whole sample or different subgroups (Annex Tables
2.3.6 and 2.3.7).31

Recent studies have argued that measured unemployment rates may not accurately capture slack in
the United States (with a resulting focus on U-6 as a
broader measure of slack) and some parts of the euro
area (ECB 2017).27,28 Furthermore, to the extent that
declining unemployment rates partly reflect workers
forced into part-time jobs, increases in such types of
employment may overstate the tightening of the labor
market. Specifically, these workers may be willing
to accept slower increases in wages and, at the same
time, may continue to seek full-time employment and
open-ended contracts. By doing so, they compete with
workers employed under more traditional arrangements and, so, weigh on their wage growth as well.
True labor market slack may therefore be larger than
suggested by headline unemployment rates.29
Extensions of the baseline approach examine whether
the changing nature of employment (as documented in
the section “Surface Healing Masks Deeper Changes”)
may have contributed to latent slack in the economy
that is not picked up in headline unemployment
numbers (Annex Tables 2.3.3–2.3.7). The analysis
augments the baseline approach by including the shares
of involuntary part-time employment and temporary
contracts.30
A higher share of involuntary part-time employment is associated with lower wage growth, even after
controlling for the influence of the variables discussed
27U-6 includes the total unemployed, plus all marginally attached
workers and total employed part-time for economic reasons as a percent of the civilian labor force plus all marginally attached workers.
28The evidence for the United States appears mixed. Krueger
(2015) argues that the measured unemployment rate overstates the
degree of slack in the United States because long-term unemployed workers have a negligible impact on wage setting. But
as the same paper notes, other studies—Aaronson and Jordan
(2014), Altig and Higgins (2014), Smith (2014), and Kumar and
Orrenius (2016)—do find some evidence on the impact of the
long-term-unemployment rate on wage growth, including at the
state level.
29Aoyagi and Ganelli (2015) study the growing importance of
nonregular employment in Japan in recent years. Katz and Krueger
(2016) discuss the rise of alternative, flexible work arrangements—
temping, contracting, freelancing through short-term gigs—in the
United States. They estimate that workers in such arrangements now
comprise 16 percent of the US workforce. See also Brainard (2016).
30These could be seen as signs of binding constraints on workers
(possibly stemming from weak labor demand since the Great
Recession), reflecting in part structural developments, though with
an important cyclical component. Given that hours per worker also
reflect worker preferences, this attribute is not considered here as a
measure of latent slack.

Contributions to Changes in Nominal Wage Growth
Putting the influences of slack, past inflation,
and trend productivity growth together, Figure 2.12
examines the contributions of these factors to changes
in average nominal wage growth since 2008 relative to
2000–07. For countries with unemployment rates below
2000–07 averages, about two-thirds of the observed
decline in nominal wage growth can be explained by
slower trend productivity growth—an effect that is
larger in 2015–16 than in previous years (given the
recent decline in trend productivity growth for this
group). Lower slack (captured here using the conventional labor market indicators—that is, the unemployment rate and its change) would have acted to increase
nominal wage growth since 2014. However, involuntary
part-time employment continues to weigh on nominal
31This could in part reflect measurement problems for this
variable; to ensure cross-country comparability, the analysis uses a
measure that does not contain information on regular versus nonregular contracts, but rather one that adheres to a legal definition of
temporariness. See also note 18.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

85

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 2.11. Effects of Involuntary Part-Time Employment on
Growth of Compensation per Hour, 2000–16

Figure 2.12. Decomposition of Wage Dynamics, 2000–16
(Percentage-point change relative to 2000–07 average)

(Percentage points)

A higher share of involuntary part-time employment is associated with lower
wage growth, even after controlling for the inﬂuence of other variables. The effect
is more pronounced in countries where the unemployment rate is below pre-Great
Recession averages.

For countries with unemployment rates below 2000–07 averages, a large part of
the decline in nominal wage growth can be explained by slower trend labor
productivity growth, while lower slack would have acted to increase nominal wage
growth. In contrast, in countries with unemployment rates still above what they
were before the crisis, both conventional labor market slack measures and
involuntary part-time employment weigh on nominal wage growth.

0.2

Actual wage growth
Lagged inﬂation
Trend productivity growth

0.0
1

–0.2
–0.4

Conventional labor market indicators
Involuntary part-time employment share
Residual

1. Unemployment Rates Lower than 2000–07 Average

0

–0.6
–1

–0.8
–1.0
–1.2

–2

All countries

Unemployment
Unemployment Unemployment
rates lower than rates moderately rates appreciably
2000–07 average
higher than
higher than
2000–07 average 2000–07 average

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The wage variable used is compensation per hour of workers excluding the
self-employed. Markers show estimated coefﬁcients, and lines display 90 percent
conﬁdence intervals. Involuntary part-time workers are those working less than 30
hours a week because they could not ﬁnd a full-time position. The involuntary parttime employment share is calculated as the total number of involuntary part-time
workers divided by total employment. Countries with unemployment rates lower
than the 2000–07 average are CZE, DEU, GBR, ISR, JPN, SVK, and USA; countries
with unemployment rates moderately higher than the 2000–07 average are those
with increases below the median of all countries with unemployment rate
increases and comprise AUS, AUT, BEL, CAN, CHE, FIN, ISL, NOR, and SWE;
countries with unemployment rates appreciably higher than the 2000–07 average
are those with increases above the median of all countries with unemployment
rate increases and comprise DNK, ESP, FRA, GRC, IRL, ITA, NLD, PRT, and SVN.
Abbreviations in note use International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
country codes. Figure is based on columns (5) to (8) of Annex Table 2.3.3.

1

2000–07

08–12

13

14

15

16

2. Unemployment Rates Moderately Higher than 2000–07 Average

0
–1
–2
–3

2

2000–07

08–12

13

14

15

16

3. Unemployment Rates Appreciably Higher than 2000–07 Average

1
0
–1
–2

wage growth (Figure 2.12, panel 1). In contrast, in
countries with unemployment rates still above what they
were before the crisis, conventional measures of labor
market slack can explain about half of the slowdown
in nominal wage growth since 2007, with involuntary
part-time employment further weighing on wages
(although part-time employment, even if involuntary,
may have supported labor force participation and facilitated stronger engagement with the workplace than the
alternative of unemployment). Productivity growth plays
86

–3
–4

2000–07

08–12

13

14

15

16

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The wage variable used is compensation per hour of workers excluding the
self-employed. Involuntary part-time workers are those working less than 30
hours a week because they could not ﬁnd a full-time position. The involuntary
part-time employment share is calculated as the total number of involuntary parttime workers divided by total employment. Groups are as deﬁned in Figure 2.11.
The decomposition is based on the coefﬁcients reported in column (5) of Annex
Table 2.3.3 and is weighted by GDP at market exchange rates across countries.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

a smaller role, possibly as it was already slow in the years
before the crisis (Figure 2.12, panels 2 and 3).
The domestic conditions driving wages (such as
unemployment) could have a significant common
component, given economic linkages between countries as well as the common influence of global factors.
In addition, domestic conditions in one country could
have direct spillover effects on wage setting in others.
For instance, relative wage weakness in one country
could put downward pressure on wages in other countries, given the threat of production relocation toward
lower-cost destinations. These common factors would
be picked up by statistically significant time effects in
the regressions. The estimated year fixed effects tend
to be correlated with advanced economy averages of
lagged inflation, trend productivity growth, unemployment, and involuntary part-time employment.
These forces together can explain over 70 percent of
the total variation in the estimated year fixed effects.
However, as illustrated in Figure 2.13, even beyond
these factors, there is a negative residual after 2009,
and especially during 2014–16. The residual could
be picking up the effects of increased integration that
make external conditions matter more and, in general,
weigh on wage growth. Its increasing importance after
the Great Recession and after the euro area sovereign
debt crisis could point to downward pressure on wage
demands as a result of synchronized recessions, and, in
some cases, policy measures to slow wage growth and
improve competitiveness. These findings thus corroborate the earlier findings on the importance of slack
and lagged inflation on wage growth and also point to
the effects of additional common external factors.32
Underlying Drivers
Subdued nominal wage growth and changes in the
nature of employment have taken place in an environment of declining potential growth, changes to global
production processes related to automation and trade
integration, and changes in labor market institutions
(Figures 2.14 and 2.15). Further extensions of the
baseline approach to include these slower-moving
factors show that a proxy for automation (the relative price of investment goods) and diminished
medium-term growth expectations appear to weigh
32Annex Figure 2.3.1 shows a decomposition similar to that in
Figure 2.12, based on a regression with year fixed effects. The relative
importance of the different drivers (slack versus productivity) shown
in Figure 2.12 remains valid when year fixed effects are included.

Figure 2.13. Year Fixed Effects and Common Drivers, 2000–16
(Index)
The estimated year ﬁxed effects tend to be correlated with advanced economy
averages of lagged inﬂation, trend productivity growth, unemployment, and
involuntary part-time employment. However, even beyond these factors, there is a
negative residual after 2009, and especially during 2014–16. This could be
picking up the effects of increased integration as well as downward pressure on
wage demands as a result of synchronized recessions.
1.2
1.0

Residuals

Predicted values

Year ﬁxed effects

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.8
–1.0

2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Year ﬁxed effects are based on the panel ordinary least squares regression
in column (1) of Annex Table 2.3.3. Residuals are from a regression of these year
ﬁxed effects on advanced economy averages of the drivers shown in Figure 2.12
and a constant. Year ﬁxed effects and predicted values are subsequently
renormalized such that year ﬁxed effects over 2000–16 average to zero.

on wage growth alongside the influence of the forces
discussed above.33
While other results are robust to whether the years of
the Great Recession are included or not, some coefficients are sensitive to the choice of period, as shown in
Annex Tables 2.3.8 and 2.3.9. Automation—as proxied
by a decline in the relative price of investment goods—
and diminished medium-term growth expectations
consistently weigh on nominal wage growth, regardless
of whether the Great Recession years are included.
However, the coefficient on the change in union
density is sensitive to both the choice of sample years
and the inclusion of its level as an additional control.
33A decline in the relative price of investment goods can lower the
cost of automating routine tasks (Autor and Dorn, 2013). However,
this proxy may not fully capture the impact of automation on
wages—for example, advances in artificial intelligence that allow for
automation may not be perfectly measured in the relative price of
investment goods.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

87

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 2.14. Changes in Growth Expectations and Labor
Market Institutions
Subdued nominal wage growth and changes to the nature of employment have
taken place in an environment of declining potential growth and weakening worker
bargaining power.

2000–07

2012–16

4.5 1. Expected Growth
(Percent, average across advanced economies)
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

Expected growth
(one year ahead)

Expected growth
(ﬁve years ahead)

60 2. Labor Market Institutions
(Percent, average across advanced economies)
50
40
30
20
10
0

Union density
rate

Share of countries
with bi- or tripartite
agreements

Share of countries
with ﬁrm-level bargaining

3.0 3. Strictness of Employment Protection
(Index, average across advanced economies)
2.5

Changes in regulations related to individual and collective dismissals (a measure of employment protection;
see Annex 2.3.1 for details) do not have a statistically
significant effect on nominal wage growth. Because
these factors may be interrelated (an increase in global
value chain participation and offshoring of production
can, for example, contribute to lower unionization),
ascribing precise contributions to each factor’s influence on recent wage dynamics is inherently difficult.
Nevertheless, as seen in Figure 2.15, the limited decline
in the relative price of investment goods in recent years
compared with the earlier downward trend suggests
that automation (as proxied by this measure) may not
have made a large contribution to the subdued wage
dynamics following the Great Recession.34
Such slower-moving forces may have also played a
role in the increase in involuntary part-time employment, beyond the influence of cyclical factors (Annex
Table 2.3.10). While a more negative output gap
(shortfall of actual output relative to the economy’s
potential) is associated with an increase in the involuntary part-time employment share, other factors, such
as medium-term growth expectations and automation,
also appear to have had an influence (Figure 2.16).
With declining medium-term growth expectations,
firms may have preferred to hire workers part-time.
Automation of work processes could have also led to
structurally lower demand for labor. A higher services
sector share of employment is also associated with an
increase in involuntary part-time employment, consistent with the compositional shifts documented in the
section on how surface healing masks deeper changes
in advanced economy labor markets.

Summary and Policy Implications

2.0
1.5
1.0
Sources: Institutional Characteristics of Trade Unions, Wage Setting, State
Intervention, and Social Pacts database; Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Union density rate refers to net union membership as a proportion of wage
earners in employment (simple average across countries); bi- or tripartite
agreements refers to the existence of a bipartite council of a central union and
employers and/or the existence of a tripartite council with government
participation. Firm-level bargaining denotes whether bargaining takes place
predominantly at the local/company level. Strictness of employment protection
refers to individual and collective dismissals (regular contracts). The sample
consists of 26–33 advanced economies.

88

Recent labor market developments in advanced
economies point to a possible disconnect between
unemployment and wages. Whereas in many economies headline unemployment is approaching ratios
seen before the Great Recession, or has even dipped
below those levels, nominal wage growth rates continue to grow at a distinctly slower pace. For some
economies, this may reflect policy measures to slow
wage growth and improve competitiveness in the
34Studies focusing on long-term effects of automation tend to
find larger effects on the wages of particular groups, for example
middle-skilled workers (see Autor and Dorn 2013 and Chapter 3 of
the April 2017 WEO).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

Figure 2.16. Effects on Involuntary Part-Time Employment
Share, Aggregate Analysis

Figure 2.15. Long-Term Drivers of Labor Market Dynamics
Technological advancements, captured by a declining relative price of investment,
and falling union density rates could act as additional drivers of labor market
dynamics.

2.0 1. Evolution of Relative Price of Investment in Advanced Economies
(Index)

(Percentage points)

Larger declines in the relative price of investment, lower expected growth, and a
higher share of service workers are associated with a higher share of involuntary
part-time employment.
0.2

1.5

0.0

1.0

0.5
2000

02

04

06

08

10

12

14

0.4 2. Change in Relative Price of Investment by Sector, 2011–13
(Index, relative to 2000)
0.2

–0.2

–0.4

0.0
–0.2

–0.6

–0.4
–0.6
–0.8

–0.8

–1.0

MNG MNF CON INF WHO FIN OTH UTL PUB RBS AGR ACC

27 3. Evolution of Union Density Rates in Advanced Economies
(Percent)
26
25

23
22
2000

40

02

04

06

08

10

12

13

4. Union Density Rates by Sector
(Percent)
2000–07
2009–12

30
20
10
0

Percent
Five-year
increase in percentageexpected
point change
growth
in share of
(aggregate) service sector
workers

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Markers show estimated coefﬁcients, and lines display 90 percent
conﬁdence intervals. Figure is based on columns (2) to (6) of Annex Table 2.3.10.
GVC = global value chain.

24

50

Five-year
Five-year
Five-year
percentage- percentage- percentagepoint change point change point change
in GVC
in price of
in union
integration
investment density rate

MNG

MNF

CON

TRA

ACC

INF

FIN

PUB

Sources: Institutional Characteristics of Trade Unions, Wage Setting, State
Intervention, and Social Pacts database; Penn World Tables Capital Detail; World
Bank, World Development Indicators database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Numbers for advanced economies are calculated by ﬁrst aggregating over
sectors to the country level using sectoral value added as weight, and
subsequently aggregating over countries using nominal GDP as weight. Sectoral
numbers are calculated by aggregating over countries using sectoral value added
as weight. Sector abbreviations are as deﬁned in Figure 2.8.

aftermath of the global financial crisis and euro area
sovereign debt crisis. Moreover, wage weakness appears
to have a common component across advanced economies, which could reflect larger cross-border spillovers
of weak labor market conditions since the Great Recession. Subdued nominal wage growth has also occurred
in a context of a higher rate of involuntary part-time
employment, an increased share of temporary employment contracts, and a reduction in hours per worker.
The analysis finds that aggregate developments
in part-time employment, temporary contracts, and
hours, in part, reflect compositional shifts in employment away from sectors that tend to have traditional
employment arrangements (smaller shares of part-time
employment, a smaller proportion of temporary contracts, longer hours per worker) toward sectors where
more flexible arrangements dominate.
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

89

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

However, there is less evidence that sectoral shifts
in employment account for subdued wage growth.
Rather, the analysis finds that, at the country level,
labor market slack, together with weak productivity
growth and low inflation expectations, are the main
forces weighing on wage growth. Automation (proxied by the relative price of investment goods) appears
to have made a small contribution to subdued wage
dynamics following the Great Recession due to a limited decline in the relative price of investment goods
in recent years compared with the previous downward
trend. The analysis suggests that automation could
weigh on wage growth more substantially in the future
if the decline in the relative price of investment goods
were to pick up again. However, inferences about the
impact of automation are not straightforward given
that, as noted previously, the relative price of investment goods is just one channel through which its
influence on wage growth may play out.
Comparing the years since 2008 with 2000–07,
the chapter finds that in economies where unemployment rates are still appreciably above their averages
before the Great Recession, conventional measures of
labor market slack can account for about half of the
slowdown, with involuntary part-time employment
acting as a further significant drag on wages. In these
economies, wage growth is unlikely to pick up unless
slack diminishes meaningfully—an outcome that will
require continued accommodative policies to boost
aggregate demand.
In economies where unemployment rates are now
below their averages before the Great Recession and
measured slack appears low, slow productivity growth
can account for about two-thirds of the slowdown in
nominal wage growth since 2007. Even in these economies, involuntary part-time employment, while it may
have helped labor force participation and continued
engagement with the workplace, appears to be weighing on wage growth, alongside slower-moving drivers.
The evidence further indicates that countries experiencing a slowdown in trend productivity will face
headwinds to wage growth, even if unemployment
rates decline. Inflation rates will also remain low unless
wage growth accelerates beyond productivity growth
in a sustained manner. In such cases, accommodative

90

policies can help stimulate demand and lower headline
unemployment rates, but overall wage growth (and
hence inflation) may continue to remain subdued
until involuntary part-time employment diminishes or
trend productivity growth picks up. Assessing the true
degree of slack beyond measured headline unemployment rates will be important when determining the
appropriate pace of exit from accommodative monetary policies.
The evidence also suggests that involuntary
part-time employment is in turn associated with
both cyclical factors and slower-moving drivers, such
as automation, diminished medium-term growth
expectations, and the growing importance of the
services sector. Some of these developments point to a
persistent shift in the nature of work and employment
relations. Policymakers may therefore need to enhance
efforts to address the vulnerabilities that part-time
workers face. Examples of possible initiatives in that
regard include strengthening secondary and tertiary
education to upgrade skills over the longer term;
broadening minimum wage coverage where it does not
currently include part-time workers; offering prorated
paid annual, family, and sick leave to secure parity with
full-time workers; and providing subsidized training for
part-time workers for reskilling and retooling (see also
the October 2017 Fiscal Monitor and Golden 2016
for a summary of measures taken by various cities in
the United States, for example). However, any policy
actions to address the income security of workers that
hold part-time jobs or temporary contracts should be
designed to minimize possible adverse impacts on the
flexibility of labor markets and job creation.
More generally, the rise of part-time employment
and temporary contracts challenges the current
structure of social insurance systems—instituted in
many advanced economies in the aftermath of the
Great Depression and World War II—which may be
better equipped to handle “binary” employment status
(people in the labor force are either employed full-time
or unemployed). To the extent that changes in the
nature of employment are not purely cyclical, but also
related to longer-term shifts in structural factors, a
broader rethinking of the nature of social insurance
may be needed.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

Box 2.1. Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level
The skill premium—the ratio of the wages of skilled
to unskilled workers—has been the focus of a wide
body of research in recent years. Several studies look
at the flattening in the skill premium in the United
States since 2000 (Figure 2.1.1) and attribute it to:
(1) the maturation of the information technology revolution slowing the demand for highly educated labor
(Beaudry, Green, and Sand 2014, 2016), (2) a leveling
off of the complementarity between highly educated
labor and new production technologies (especially
those that rely on computers and related organizational capital), and (3) rising competition between
education groups for increasingly scarce well-paid jobs
(Valletta 2016; Autor 2017).1
Few studies, however, have analyzed the recent evolution of the skill premium in European economies.2
This box focuses on the evolution of labor market
indicators by skill level in European economies during
the most recent decade, using three cross-sections of
data for 2006, 2010, and 2014.3
The results suggest that while low- and
middle-skilled workers in Europe were hurt on the
extensive margin (hours and employment, respec-

The author of this box is Zsóka Kóczán.
1Earlier studies link the widening wage dispersion in some
advanced economies (in particular the United States and the
United Kingdom) in the 1980s, and to a lesser extent the 1990s,
to trade liberalization (Wood 1991, 1994, 1995; Leamer 1992,
1996; Burtless 1995), more intensive trade and migration (Borjas
and Ramey 1995), outsourcing (Feenstra and Hanson 1996,
2001), or skill-biased technological change (Katz and Murphy
1992; Berman, Bound, and Griliches 1994; Autor, Katz, and
Krueger 1998; Katz and Autor 1999; DiNardo and Card 2002;
Autor, Katz, and Kearney 2008). Autor and Dorn (2013) analyze
the polarization of employment and earnings in the United
States between 1980 and 2005 and emphasized the role of automation of routine tasks.
2Parteka (2010) notes the increasing wage gap for low-skilled
workers in the EU15 (Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom) during
1995–2005 in most sectors, and EU (2015) finds that earnings
inequality increased from 2006 to 2011 in two-thirds of the
members of the European Union. Cho and Díaz (2016),
however, note that the skill premium fell in 2000–08 in the
Baltic countries.
3Low-skilled workers are defined as those with up to
lower-secondary education, middle-skilled as those with
upper-secondary or postsecondary nontertiary education, and
high-skilled as those with tertiary education.

Figure 2.1.1. Evolution of Skill Premiums in
the United States
2.75

2.50

2.25
High/low-skilled
High/middle-skilled

2.00

1.75

1.50

1.25
1979

85

90

95

2000

05

10

16

Sources: US Bureau of Labor Statistics; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: Low-skilled refers to workers with less than a high
school diploma; middle-skilled refers to high school
graduates with no college education; high-skilled refers to
those with at least a bachelor’s degree.

tively), the past decade brought relative gains for these
groups in terms of hourly wages.

Shrinking Wage Dispersion
The skill premium declined in European economies
between 2006 and 2014 (Figure 2.1.2); this is true in
the case of the ratio of wages for high- to low-skilled
workers as well as for high- to middle-skilled workers. In the United States, the former also declined
over this period, however, the latter showed a
small increase, pointing to relative wage losses of
middle-skilled workers.
Examining variation across sectors reveals that sectors
with a higher share of low-skilled workers saw higher
nominal wage growth. Naturally (given that the shares
add up to 1) the opposite is the case for sectors with a
higher share of high-skilled workers (Figure 2.1.3).

Hollowing Out of Employment
Changes in employment point to hollowing out in
European economies as well—in line with the liter-

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

91

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 2.1 (continued)

2.0 1. Skill Premiums, 2006 and 2014
2006
2014

1.5
1.0
0.5

10

High/low-skilled

High/middleskilled

Middle/lowskilled

–10
–20
–30
–40
–50
–60

High/low-skilled

High/middle-skilled

MNG MNF CON TRD ACC FIN PUB EDU HEA

Sources: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Low-skilled refers to workers with less than a high
school diploma; middle-skilled refers to high school
graduates with no college education; high-skilled refers to
those with at least a bachelor’s degree. The ﬁgure shows
simple averages across sectors and economies. ACC =
accommodation and food service activities; CON =
construction; EDU = education; FIN = ﬁnancial and
insurance activities; HEA = human health and social work
activities; MNF = manufacturing; MNG = mining and
quarrying; PUB = public administration and defense; TRD =
wholesale and retail trade.

ature on the United States.4 The employment shares
of middle-skilled workers fell, while those of low- and
high-skilled workers increased (Figure 2.1.4). This
pattern can be observed in all sectors, however, during
this period it was starkest in services (finance, public
administration, health, education). While sectoral data
on the price of investment is limited, there are some
evidence that sectors more exposed to technological
change (that experienced larger declines in their price
of investment goods) also saw more pronounced

4See also Das and Hilgenstock (forthcoming) for a larger
sample of advanced as well as emerging market economies.

92

3.0

1. High-Skilled

2.5

ACC

2.0

OTH

TRD
CON

MNG
HEA

1.5
1.0
0

PUB

MNF

FIN

EDU

10
20
30
40
50
60
Employment share of high-skilled
workers, 2010 (percent)

70

2. Change in Skill Premiums by Sector, 2006–14

0

Nominal wage growth, 2012–15
(percentage points)

0.0

Figure 2.1.3. Nominal Wage Growth by
Sector and Skill Group
Nominal wage growth, 2012–15
(percentage points)

Figure 2.1.2. Skill Premiums and Changes in
Skill Premiums in European Economies

3.0

2. Low-Skilled

MNG

2.0

EDU
1.5
1.0
0

MNF

PUB

2.5

OTH
HEA

TRD

ACC
CON

FIN
5
10
15
20
25
Employment share of low-skilled
workers, 2010 (percent)

30

Sources: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Low-skilled refers to workers with less than a high
school diploma; high-skilled refers to those with at least a
bachelor’s degree. ACC = accommodation and food service
activities; CON = construction; EDU = education; FIN =
ﬁnancial and insurance activities; HEA = human health and
social work activities; MNF = manufacturing; MNG = mining
and quarrying; OTH = other services; PUB = public
administration and defense; TRD = wholesale and retail
trade.

hollowing out declines in the employment shares of
middle-skilled labor.5

Falling Hours among Low-Skilled Workers
Middle-skilled workers lost out in terms of employment shares, but low-skilled workers appear to have
experienced a larger decline in hours than other skill
groups. Country-sector-level data on hours by skill
level are unfortunately not readily available. However,
5Chapter 3 of the April 2017 World Economic Outlook highlights a particularly large impact of technology (declining price
of investment and exposure to routinization) on the labor share
of middle-skilled workers.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

Box 2.1 (continued)
Figure 2.1.4. Employment Shares by Skill

Figure 2.1.5. Employment Shares by Skill
and Changes in Hours per Worker

2006
2014

50
40
30
20
10
0

Low-skilled

30
20

Middle-skilled

High-skilled

2. Employment Share Changes, 2006–14
(Percentage points)

10
0
–10
–20
–30
–40

Low-skilled
Middle-skilled
High-skilled
MNG MNF CON TRD ACC FIN PUB EDU HEA

Sources: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Low-skilled refers to workers with less than a high
school diploma; middle-skilled refers to high school
graduates with no college education; high-skilled refers to
those with at least a bachelor’s degree. ACC =
accommodation and food service activities; CON =
construction; EDU = education; FIN = ﬁnancial and
insurance activities; HEA = human health and social work
activities; MNF = manufacturing; MNG = mining and
quarrying; PUB = public administration and defense; TRD =
wholesale and retail trade.

sectors with larger shares of low-skilled workers have
seen larger declines in hours (Figure 2.1.5). This agrees
with the findings of EU (2015), which highlights
significantly higher inequality levels for annual earn-

Average change in hours
per worker, 2012 –15

60

Average change in hours
per worker, 2012 –15

1. Employment Shares, 2006 and 2014
(Percent)

70

15 1. High-Skilled
MNG
10
5
MNF
TRD
0
PUB
–5
FIN
–10 HEA
CON
EDU
–15
OTH
ACC
–20
–25
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Employment share of high-skilled
workers, pre-2006 (percent)

70

15 2. Low- and Middle-Skilled
MNG
Middle-skilled
10
MNG
Low-skilled
5 MNF
MNF
TRD
0
TRD PUB
PUB
FIN
–5
FIN
HEA
–10 CON
CON
EDU
EDU
–15
HEA OTH
OTH
–20
ACC
ACC
–25
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Employment share of low-/middle-skilled
workers, pre-2006 (percent)

Sources: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Low-skilled refers to workers with less than a high
school diploma; middle-skilled refers to high school
graduates with no college education; high-skilled refers to
those with at least a bachelor’s degree. ACC =
accommodation and food service activities; CON =
construction; EDU = education; FIN = ﬁnancial and
insurance activities; HEA = human health and social work
activities; MNF = manufacturing; MNG = mining and
quarrying; OTH = other services; PUB = public
administration and defense; TRD = wholesale and retail
trade.

ings than inequality measures for monthly and hourly
wages. Number of months and, to a lesser extent,
hours worked in the year appear to be significant
sources of variation.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

93

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 2.2. Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence
This box examines the evolving nature of worker
contract types and their potential implications for
wage dynamics in Europe during the postcrisis period.
The data set used in the analysis is from the Wage
Dynamics Network (WDN), constructed to capture
determinants of nominal wage dynamics for a large
sample of European firms (see Izquierdo and others
2017 for further details on the data set).1 The data set
is generated by three waves of surveys conducted in
2007, 2010, and 2014.

(Percentage points)

6
4
2
0

Changes in Worker Contract Type

–2

Worker contract type in the firm-level survey falls into
one of three categories: permanent full-time, permanent
part-time, and temporary. Examining these three categories of contracts by sector during 2007–14, the patterns
seen in nonmanufacturing sectors appear to diverge
from those registered in the manufacturing sector.
Most nonmanufacturing sectors appear to have
experienced a sharp decline in the permanent full-time
worker share and increases in more flexible contracts,
such as permanent part-time hires and workers on
temporary contracts (Figure 2.2.1). In particular:
•• Permanent full-time worker share: The permanent
full-time worker share, averaged across nonmanufacturing sectors, declined from 81.8 percent in
2007 to 77.3 percent in 2014; in contrast, the share
of permanent full-time workers stayed relatively
stable for the manufacturing sector: 87.2 percent in
2007 and 85.9 percent in 2014.
•• More flexible contracts: The flip side of the above
development is that the nonmanufacturing sectors
experienced a higher increase in both the permanent part-time worker and temporary worker share
of employment compared with the manufacturing
sector. The share of permanent part-time workers
increased by over 2 percentage points from 9.5 percent in 2007 to 11.8 percent in 2014 for nonmanufacturing sectors, whereas the manufacturing sector
experienced a mild increase in this category of less
than a percentage point, from 5.6 percent to 6.4 percent over the same period. Similarly, the share of
temporary workers in nonmanufacturing sectors rose
from 8.6 percent in 2007 to 10.3 percent in 2014,
while the share remained broadly unchanged for the
manufacturing sector in these two periods (7.1 percent in 2007 and 7.6 percent in 2014).

–4

The author of this box is Gee Hee Hong.
1The author would like to thank the European Central Bank
for making the WDN data sets available for this analysis.

94

Figure 2.2.1. Changes in Employment Shares

–6
–8

Permanent full-time workers
Permanent part-time workers
Temporary workers

–10
–12

MNF

ENR

CON

TRD

MRK

FIN

NMR

Sources: Wage Dynamics Network, 2007, 2009, and 2014
waves; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: CON = construction; ENR = energy; FIN = ﬁnancial
intermediation; MNF = manufacturing; MRK = market
services; NMR = nonmarket services; TRD = trade.

The magnitude of the decline in the permanent
full-time worker share also varies across countries and
appears related to the extent of healing in headline
unemployment following the Great Recession (Figure
2.2.2). Countries whose unemployment rate is now
below the 2000–07 average (blue bars) experienced a
smaller decline in the share of permanent full-time workers than those where unemployment rate remains above
the 2000–07 average (red bars).2 Although the increase
in the temporary contract share is more pronounced
for most of the nonmanufacturing sectors for countries
in the first group, countries in the second group show
a higher increase in the share of permanent part-time
workers in some sectors, such as trade and energy.
2Countries with relatively high unemployment rates are those
where the unemployment rate in 2016 was higher than their
respective average unemployment rate between 2000 and 2007.
These include Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, France, Greece, Ireland,
Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain,
and Switzerland. Countries with relatively low unemployment
rates are those where the unemployment rate in 2016 was lower
than their respective average unemployment rate between 2000
and 2007. These include the Czech Republic, Estonia, Germany,
Malta, the Slovak Republic, and the United Kingdom.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

Box 2.2 (continued)
Wage Dynamics

Figure 2.2.2. Changes in Employment
Shares, 2007–14
(Percentage points)

Countries with unemployment rates in 2016
lower than 2000–07 average
Countries with unemployment rates in 2016
higher than 2000–07 average
8

1. Permanent Full-Time Workers

6
4
2
0
–2
–4

Across the sample of 20,000 firms surveyed in 2014,
sectors with a higher share of workers on temporary
contracts also tend to have higher wage cuts and
freezes. Figure 2.2.3 shows a positive relationship
across sectors between the share of workers on temporary contracts and the fraction of firms within the
sector reporting wage cuts and freezes. In contrast,
there is a negative relationship between the share of
permanent full-time workers and the fraction of firms
with wage cuts and freezes. The patterns thus suggest
an association between worker contract type and wage
setting: sectors with a larger share of workers on more
traditional contracts (permanent full-time) tend to
experience fewer wage cuts and freezes as well.

–6
–8
MNF

TRD

MRK

ENR

CON

2. Permanent Part -Time Workers

4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
–8

8

FIN

MNF

TRD

MRK

ENR

CON

1. Permanent Full-Time Workers

80
60
40
20
0
40

50
60
70
80
90
100
Share of permanent full-time workers (percent)

3. Temporary Workers

6

100

4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
–8
–10

(Percent)
100

6

–10

Figure 2.2.3. Wage Cuts and Freezes, 2014

Likelihood of wage cuts and freezes

8

FIN

FIN

MNF

TRD

MRK

ENR

CON

Sources: Wage Dynamics Network, 2007, 2009, and 2014
waves; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: CON = construction; ENR = energy; FIN = ﬁnancial
intermediation; MNF = manufacturing; MRK = market
services; TRD = trade.

Likelihood of wage cuts and freezes

–10

2. Workers with Temporary Contracts

80
60
40
20
0
0

10
20
30
40
Share of workers on temporary contracts (percent)

Sources: Wage Dynamics Network, 2007, 2009, and 2014
waves; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Each marker in the ﬁgure represents a country sector.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

95

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 2.3. Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence
How have revenue growth performance and
volatility affected firms’ labor-related decisions in the
postcrisis period? What role has firm-level financial
vulnerability at the outset of the crisis played when it
comes to postcrisis firm-level labor market choices?
This box looks at these questions using the ORBIS
data set compiled by Bureau van Dijk. It is a rich,
cross-country, firm-level data set that contains firms’
balance sheet variables as well as total wage bill and
total employment information.1 The box first explores
the association between recent growth (which arguably
influences firm-level growth expectations) and uncertainty, and firms’ wages and employment growth following the global financial crisis. To assess the potential
effect of financial-crisis-related factors on firms’ wage
The author of this box is Gee Hee Hong.
1Comparability of the variables across countries and over time
is ensured as described in Duval, Hong, and Timmer (2017),
following the methodology of Gal and Hijzen (2016).

Figure 2.3.1. Estimated Nominal Wage Growth
and Employment Growth Differences Based
on Uncertainty and Growth Expectations
(Percentage points)

Growth Expectations and Uncertainty as
Determinants of Wage and Employment Growth
To the extent that recent growth influences expectations
about future growth (for example, if firms form adaptive
expectations), trailing five-year average revenue growth
can be considered a proxy for firm-level medium-term
growth expectations. Moreover, the standard deviation of

Figure 2.3.2. Wage and Employment Growth
by Debt Maturity in 2008
(Percentage points)

2.5
2.0

and employment decisions, the box further explores
whether firms with different degrees of ex ante financial
vulnerability exhibit different wage and/or employment
adjustment patterns in the postcrisis period.
The evidence suggests that firms with stronger recent
growth performance (and thus arguably more optimistic
growth expectations) and low volatility exhibit higher
wage and employment growth. Moreover, firms with
weaker balance sheets before the crisis experience lower
growth in wages and employment following the crisis,
which highlights the potential role of crisis-related legacies
in firms’ labor-related decisions in the postcrisis period.

1
0

Nominal wage growth
Employment growth

–1

1.5

–2

1.0

–3

0.5

–4

0.0

–5
–6

–0.5

–7

–1.0

Volatility
(revenue based)

Volatility
(output based)

Growth
expectations

Sources: ORBIS; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Wage is deﬁned as total wage bill divided by total
employment for each ﬁrm. The blue bars show the estimated
wage growth differences between ﬁrms with high
uncertainty/growth expectations (75th percentile) and those
with low uncertainty/growth expectations (25th percentile).
The red bars show the corresponding employment growth
differences.

96

–8

Change in wage per worker Change in employment

Sources: ORBIS; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The left bar represents the estimated difference in
postcrisis wage growth minus precrisis wage growth
between a ﬁrm with a high ratio of debt maturing in 2008
(75th percentile) and a ﬁrm with a low ratio of debt maturing
in 2008 (25th percentile). The right bar represents the
estimated difference in postcrisis employment growth
minus precrisis employment growth between the two types
of ﬁrms.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

Box 2.3 (continued)
revenue growth (volatility)—or its ratio to average revenue
growth over the trailing five-year interval (coefficient
of variation)—can be considered a proxy for firm-level
uncertainty about the operating environment.
The evidence suggests that firms with more optimistic
growth expectations or lower volatility show stronger
wage and employment growth in the postcrisis period.2
Figure 2.3.1 compares the differences in average wage
and employment growth rates since 2008 between firms
whose volatility and growth expectations are in the 25th
and 75th percentiles. Wage growth is 0.3 to 0.6 percentage point lower for firms with higher volatility than
for their counterparts with lower volatility (depending
on the measure used to construct volatility). In addition, firms whose growth expectations are more optimistic show 2 percentage points stronger wage growth than
their less optimistic counterparts. Similarly, for employment growth, firms with higher volatility experience 0.5
to 0.8 percentage point lower employment growth than
those with lower volatility. Optimism in growth expectations contributes positively to employment growth as
well: firms with more optimistic expectations experience
nearly 1.5 percentage points higher employment growth
than those that are less optimistic.
2The two main dependent variables are the annual growth rate
of total employment for each firm and the annual growth rate of
wage per employee, in which the wage per employee is calculated
as the total wage bill divided by the total number of employees
for each firm.

Financial Frictions and Labor-Related Decisions
Firms whose financial vulnerability was higher before
the crisis appear to exhibit weaker wage and employment
growth in its aftermath, which highlights the potential
role of financial frictions or crisis-related legacies in wage
and employment adjustments following the crisis.
Adopting the difference-in-differences methodology
that compares the averages of precrisis and postcrisis
wage and employment growth following Duval, Hong,
and Timmer (2017), firms with ex ante more vulnerable balance sheets—higher leverage and rollover risk
entering the financial crisis—exhibit lower wage and
employment growth in the postcrisis years. The results
are robust to controlling for labor productivity and multifactor productivity, following Wooldridge (2009).3
Table 2.3.1 reports the results. Controlling for
different measures of productivity, a 10 percentage
point higher leverage ratio before the crisis is associated
with 0.1 percentage point weaker growth in wages and
employment after the crisis. Similarly, firms with higher
precrisis rollover risk show about 0.3 to 0.4 percentage
point weaker growth in wages and employment.
3Rollover risk, measured as the ratio of current liabilities (that is,
debt maturing within a year) to total sales in the 2007 balance sheet,
allows for a causal interpretation. Firms’ debt structure in 2007 is
unlikely to be associated with other unobserved firm characteristics
affecting wage and employment decisions given that the timing of
the global financial crisis was not foreseen from the vantage point in
2007 (Almeida and others 2012; Duval, Hong, and Timmer 2017).

Table 2.3.1. Precrisis Financial Vulnerabilities and Postcrisis Labor Adjustments
(1)
Leverage Precrisis1
Debt Maturing 20082
Productivity (multifactor productivity)3
Productivity (labor productivity)4
Country Fixed Effects
Sector Fixed Effects

(2)

Changes in Log(average wage/worker)
–0.0130***
0.005
(0.003)
(0.005)
–0.038***
–0.036***
(0.005)
(0.004)
0.790***
(0.145)
0.540***
(0.123)
yes
yes
yes
yes

(3)

(4)

Changes in Log(employment)
–0.011***
–0.010***
(0.003)
(0.003)
–0.034***
–0.032***
(0.005)
(0.004)
0.464***
(0.119)
0.343***
(0.111)
yes
yes
yes
yes

Number of Observations
82,162
98,386
82,204
98,420
R2
0.0253
0.0280
0.0269
0.0268
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Changes in log(average wage/worker) is the difference between average wage per worker between the postcrisis and precrisis periods.
Changes in log(employment) is the difference between log of average employment between the postcrisis and precrisis period. Standard errors in
parentheses are clustered at the country-sector level. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
1Average precrisis debt-to-assets ratio.
2Amount of debt maturing in 2008 divided by average total precrisis sales.
3Calculated using the methodology introduced by Wooldridge (2009).
4Calculated as the ratio of value-added output to total employment at the firm level.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

97

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Annex Table 2.1.1. Country Coverage
Aggregate Analysis

Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Lithuania, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Slovak
Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States

Sectoral Analysis

Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy,
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom, United States

Annex Table 2.1.2. Data Sources
Indicator
Compensation, Wages
Employment
Part-Time Employment
Involuntary Part-Time Employment
Temporary Employment
Hours per Worker, Total Hours
Output Gap
Inflation, Expected Inflation
Unemployment Rate
Productivity
Indicators of Employment Protection
Expected Growth (aggregate)
Gross Output (sectoral)
Relative Price of Investment Goods (aggregate)
Price of Investment (sectoral)
Capital Intensity
Exports, Final Exports, Final Imports
Foreign Value Added Share of Exports
Labor Market Policies

Source
Eurostat; national authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Eurostat; national authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Eurostat; national authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Eurostat; national authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Eurostat; national authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Eurostat; national authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
IMF, World Economic Outlook database
Consensus Forecast database; IMF, World Economic Outlook database
IMF, World Economic Outlook database
Eora Multi-Region Input-Output table; Eurostat; national authorities; Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
IMF, World Economic Outlook database
Eora Multi-Region Input-Output database
World Bank, World Development Indicators
Penn World Tables Capital Detail
Penn World Tables
World Input-Output Database
Eora Multi-Region Input-Output database
Database on Institutional Characteristics of Trade Unions, Wage Setting, State
Intervention, and Social Pacts

Source: IMF staff compilation.

Annex 2.1. Country Coverage and Data

Annex 2.2. Empirical Methodologies

The aggregate analysis is based on both quarterly and annual data for 29 advanced economies
during 2000:Q1–16:Q4. Sectoral regressions are
based on annual data for 20 advanced economies
during 2000–15.
The primary data sources for labor market variables are Eurostat, the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD), and
national authorities. Key sources for other variables
used in this chapter are the Eora Multi-Region
Input-Output database; Database on Institutional
Characteristics of Trade Unions, Wage Setting, State
Intervention and Social Pacts (ICTWSS); IMF World
Economic Outlook database; and the OECD.

Aggregate Analysis

98

The aggregate analysis uses a wage Phillips curve
framework proposed by Gali (2011). The original
equation used by Gali (2011) is similar to equation (2.1):35
35Gali’s wage Phillips curve includes both the current and previous
periods’ unemployment rate given that the unemployment rate in
the United States follows an autoregressive (2) process, in which the
expected unemployment rate is a function of current and previous
unemployment rates. The analysis in this chapter uses a similar
argument for controlling for the change in unemployment rate: it
captures the expectation of the evolution of unemployment rates
beyond the current rate. Intuitively, this captures the importance
of whether a country is entering a recession (rising unemployment
rates) or recovering from one (falling unemployment rates).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

Annex Figure 2.2.1. Distribution of Real Compensation
Growth Measures
(Percentage-point difference relative to 2007)

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
–6

(Percentage-point change, 2016 relative to 2000–07 average)

1. Deﬂated Using Consumer Price Index

8

1. Deﬂated Using Consumer Price Index

Growth of real
compensation per hour

6
4
2

DEU

0

JPN
KOR
USA
CAN
GBR

–2
–4
–6
–10

2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

–5

AUS

ESP

FRA ITA

0
5
Unemployment rate

10

15

2. Deﬂated Using GDP Deﬂator
8

2. Deﬂated Using GDP Deﬂator

6
Growth of real
compensation per hour

5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
–6
–7

Annex Figure 2.2.2. Growth of Real Compensation per Hour
and Unemployment Rates

2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

Sources: Eurostat; national authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The sample excludes Baltic countries. The wage variable used is
compensation per hour of workers excluding the self-employed. The horizontal
line inside each box represents the median, the upper and lower edges of the box
show the top and bottom quartiles, and the red markers denote the top and
bottom deciles.

w ​ = ​
​​​π​ i,t
​  α​  i​​  + θ ​π​ i,t − 1​​  + ​β​  1​​ ​u​ i,t​​  + ​β​  2​​  ∆ ​u​ i,t​​  + ​ε​  i,t​​, 	​(​​2.1​)​​​​
w ​​​  is
​​π​ i,t

in which, for country ​i​and time ​t​,
the nominal
wage growth, ​​π​ i,t − 1​​​is lagged year-over-year inflation, ​​
u​ i,t​​​is the unemployment rate, and ​∆ ​u​ i,t​​​ is the change
in the unemployment rate.
To explore how productivity growth and labor
underutilization may affect aggregate wage growth,
equation (2.1) is augmented with two sets of variables: trend productivity growth and labor market underutilization measures. Equation (2.2)
is estimated:
w ​ = ​
​​​π​ i,t
​  α​  i​​  + θ ​π​ i,t − 1​​  + ​β​  1​​ ​u​ i,t​​  + ​β​  2​​  ∆ ​u​ i,t​​
⃗
+ γ ​​g¯​​  Y/H
i,t​  ​  + φ ​​Z​​  i,t​​  + ​ε​  i,t​​, 	​(​​2.2​)​​​​

in which ​​​g¯ ​​  Y/H
i,t​  ​​is the trend of the growth rate of real
output per hour, and ​​​Z​​ ⃗ ​​  i,t​​​ are labor underutilization measures. These measures include the share of

4
2
0
–2

JPN
DEU

USA
GBR

–4
–6
–10

CAN

–5

AUS

ESP

FRA ITA
KOR

0
5
Unemployment rate

10

15

Sources: National authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The wage variable used is compensation per hour of workers excluding the
self-employed. Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) country codes. The 10 largest advanced economies (by 2016
nominal GDP in US dollars) are labeled.

employed workers who take part-time jobs involuntarily, with part-time jobs defined as less than 30
hours a week, and the share of employed workers who
have temporary work contracts. The primer earlier
in this chapter explains why these drivers matter for
wage growth. As noted there, the analysis focuses on
nominal wage growth; Annex Figures 2.2.1 and 2.2.2
illustrate real wage dynamics for reference.
Annex Figure 2.2.3 shows the dynamics of two key
drivers in equation (2.2): trend productivity growth
and lagged inflation (a proxy for inflation indexation).
The analysis examines several robustness tests:
•• Data frequency: The labor market underutilization
measures (involuntary part-time and temporary
contract employment shares) are not available
at quarterly frequency—hence the analysis of
their impact on aggregate wage growth in Annex
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

99

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Annnex Figure 2.2.3. Factors Associated with Nominal Wage
Growth
(Percentage point difference relative to 2007)
3

1. Trend Labor Productivity Growth, Advanced Economies

2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5

Annex Figure 2.2.4. Effects of Involuntary Part-Time
Employment on Compensation and Wages, 2000–16
(Percentage points)
0.4
0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.8
–1.0
–1.2
–1.4

1. All Countries

0.4
0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.8
–1.0
–1.2
–1.4

2. Unemployment Rates Lower than 2000–07 Average

0.4
0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.8
–1.0
–1.2
–1.4

3. Unemployment Rates Moderately Higher than 2000–07 Average

0.4
0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.8
–1.0
–1.2
–1.4

4. Unemployment Rates Appreciably Higher than 2000–07 Average

Compensation per
employee

Compensation per hour

Wage per hour

2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
2. One-Quarter-Lagged Inﬂation, Advanced Economies

2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: Trend labor productivity growth is calculated as ﬁve-year trailing averages.
Annual averages over four quarters are shown in panel 2. The horizontal line
inside each box represents the median, the upper and lower edges of the box
show the top and bottom quartiles, and the red markers denote the top and
bottom deciles.

Tables 2.3.3–2.3.9 uses data at annual frequency.36 Robustness tests suggest that interpolation to
quarterly series (uniform values across quarters or
linear interpolation) does not significantly affect
the results.
•• Alternative wage measures (Annex Table 2.3.5;
Annex Figure 2.2.4): Robustness tests examine different choices of wage measures as the dependent
variable in equation (2.2)—aggregate compensa36The unemployment rate and its change and trend productivity
growth are defined using annual data; lagged inflation is based on the
year-over-year change in the consumer price index lagged by one quarter (wage contracts may not be set in a synchronized way, hence inflationary shocks may affect aggregate wages with a short lag). Results are
broadly robust to, instead, using annual inflation with a one-year lag.
In some specification (for example, Annex Table 2.3.3, column 5), this
can lead to more plausible lagged inflation coefficients.

100

Compensation per
employee

Compensation per
employee

Compensation per
employee

Compensation per hour

Compensation per hour

Compensation per hour

Wage per hour

Wage per hour

Wage per hour

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Markers show estimated coefﬁcients, and lines display 90 percent
conﬁdence intervals. Involuntary part-time workers are those working less than
30 hours a week because they could not ﬁnd a full-time position. The involuntary
part-time employment share is calculated as the total number of involuntary parttime workers divided by total employment. Groups are as deﬁned in Figure 2.11.
Figure is based on Annex Tables 2.3.4 and 2.3.5.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

tion divided by total employees (compensation
per employee), aggregate wage bill divided by total
employees (wage per employee), aggregate compensation divided by total hours (compensation
per hour), and aggregate wage bill divided by total
hours (wage per hour, which includes aggregate
social contributions of employers). Annex Figure 2.2.5 further illustrates that public sector wages
are unlikely to have been an important driver of
aggregate wages during 2009–16.
•• Alternative measures of explanatory variables: The
magnitude and significance of the coefficients are,
in general, robust to alternative measures of slack,
inflation expectations, and trend productivity
growth (Annex Table 2.3.2).
•• Country-by-country regressions: The significance and
the magnitude of the coefficients of trend productivity growth and the involuntary part-time employment share are broadly similar when relying on
country-by-country regressions (Annex Table 2.3.1,
columns 4 and 8).
•• Instrumental variables: Reverse causality from wage
growth to price inflation may occur if firms pass
faster growth in labor costs on in the prices they
charge. This is alleviated by instrumenting lagged
inflation with past changes in oil prices, which is
critical in helping identify the degree of inflation
indexation.37 There are two possible concerns
regarding the validity of oil price changes as the
instrumental variable for lagged inflation: first,
global demand shocks may drive both oil prices and
wage growth. This is partly alleviated by the current
wage Phillips curve equation already controlling
for several channels through which global demand
shocks could influence wages—slack and change in
slack. The second concern is whether there could
be reverse causality from wage growth to other
inflation drivers. However, this too is unlikely to
drive the main results—lower wage growth should
cause lower labor market slack, which would bias
the ordinary least squares estimates of the impact
of slack on wage growth downward rather than
upward. Similar logic applies to the labor underutilization measure. The main result—that involuntary
37Addressing this reverse causality could be expected to reduce
the coefficient of lagged inflation. Annex Table 2.3.3 suggests that
this is indeed the case for groups A and C. There could be some
idiosyncratic reasons biasing the ordinary least squares estimate of
lagged inflation downward for group B (the coefficient is negative
and insignificant).

Annex Figure 2.2.5. Correlations between Aggregate Wage
Growth and Two-Quarter-Lagged Public Wage Growth
(Percent)
70
60

2001–08
2009–16

50
40
30
20
10
0
–10
–20
–30
–40
–50

USA

NLD

DEU

GBR

FIN

CZE

EST

LTU

AUS

IRL

Sources: Eurostat; national authorities; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) country codes.

part-time employment weighs on wage growth—is
not sensitive to using ordinary least squares or
instrumental variables estimation.38
The effects of secular drivers on job attributes are
examined using a cross-country panel regression of 36
countries from 2000 to 2016, including country and
year fixed effects, and controlling for the output gap.
In this analysis, the share of involuntary part-time
workers at the country level is the main dependent
variable. Potential secular drivers include measures
of worker bargaining power (proxied by the five-year
change in the union density rate), the five-year change
in the share of employment in the services sector,
technological change (proxied by the five-year change
38Reverse causality from wage growth to trend productivity
growth may cause upward bias in the effect of trend productivity
growth through employment growth. However, estimated coefficients
of the labor productivity trend are often lower than what is implied
from other studies in the literature (for instance, Karabarbounis and
Neiman 2014), especially if the sample is restricted to the post–Great
Recession period. Together, these suggest that downward attenuation
bias may dominate reverse causality, causing an underestimation of
the role of trend productivity growth. Results are broadly unchanged
when imposing the coefficient of trend productivity growth to be 1
or the value implied from other studies.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

101

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Annex Table 2.2.1. Aggregate Forces and Sectoral Exposures
Near-Term Factors
Medium-Term Factors
Long-Term Factors

Measure
Slack inflation

Aggregate Variable
Aggregate output gap, inflation

Trend productivity growth
Expected growth

Five-year trailing average of
productivity growth
Expected growth
(one and five years ahead)

Trade openness
Technological progress
Worker bargaining power
Ease of hiring and firing

Sectoral Variation
Interaction with sectoral correlation

Change in relative
price of investment
Union density rate, bi- or tripartite
agreement, level of bargaining
Ease of hiring and firing

Interaction with sectoral correlation;
sectoral expected growth (adaptive)
Exports, intermediate exports, global value
chain participation, final imports
Interaction with sectoral capital intensity;
change in sectoral price of investment
Interactions with sectoral characteristics:
high expected growth, high volatility
Interactions with sectoral characteristics:
high expected growth, high volatility

Source: IMF staff compilation.
Note: Sample comprises 20 advanced economies: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy,
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom, and United States.

in the relative price of investment), growth expectations, and global value chain integration (proxied by
the five-year change in foreign value added as a percent
of exports).

Sectoral Analysis
As a complement to the aggregate analysis, drivers
of nominal wage growth and part-time employment
shares are examined at the sectoral level.39 Following
the structure of the aggregate analysis, sector-level
regressions explore the roles of slack, medium-term
growth expectations, technological progress, increased
trade integration, and changes in labor market
institutions.40 These are examined as possible drivers
of nominal wage growth and part-time employment
to determine their effect on different margins of
adjustment. The analysis exploits variation in sectoral
exposure to aggregate forces to shed light on mechanisms that operate within countries.41
As noted earlier, across several advanced economies, a rise in involuntary part-time employment has
39Estimates of involuntary part-time employment are not available
at the sectoral level, so the focus here is on total part-time employment, including both voluntary and involuntary.
40Control variables are in line with those used in ECB (2009)
and EC (2003), as well as in the literature on interindustry wage
differentials and wage dispersion (for example, Erdil and Yetkiner 2001; Koeniger, Leonardi, and Nunziata 2007; and Du Caju
and others 2010). Wage regressions also control for inflation and
(sectoral) trend productivity growth.
41The regressions also control for country, sector, and year
fixed effects.

102

accompanied subdued wage growth, even as headline
employment has fallen. These developments have
occurred in the context of falling growth expectations
and declines in worker bargaining power, as shown in
Figures 2.14 and 2.15.42
The sectoral analysis examines the effects of increasing trade openness, automation (captured by the
declining relative price of investment), and slowing
sectoral growth rates (used to construct a measure of
adaptive growth expectations at the sectoral level) on
nominal wage growth and part-time employment as
a share of total employment.43 It does so by exploiting sectoral variations in exposure to aggregate forces
(Annex Table 2.2.1). For instance, country-level slack
could be expected to matter more for labor market
dynamics in sectors that are more correlated with the
aggregate economy, and the effects of a decline in the
aggregate relative price of investment could vary by the
initial capital intensity of the sector.
The analysis relies on annual data for a sample of
20 advanced economies starting in 2000, and relates
changes in nominal wage growth to the same cyclical
and secular drivers used in the aggregate analysis, controlling for country, sector, and year fixed effects:

42Panel 4 of Figure 2.15 shows the decline in union density rates
occurring in most sectors, with the notable exception of public
administration; coverage of sectoral union density rates is unfortunately too limited to be included in the regression analysis.
43Sectoral expected growth is measured as the five-year trailing
average of sectoral gross output growth rates. As noted above,
this could be capturing expected productivity growth as well as
demand conditions.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

​​y​ ijt​​  = ​α​  i​​  + ​μ​j​​  + ​τ​  t​​  + β ​Xijt
​  ​​  + γ ​Zjt​  ​​​,

(2.3)

in which ​​y​ ijt​​​is nominal wage growth, ​​Xijt
​ ​​​ includes measures that vary at the country-sector level, such as the
share of part-time employment, how correlated a sector’s gross output growth is with the overall economy,
sectoral trend productivity growth (measured again
using a five-year trailing average), sectoral expected
growth (an adaptive measure based on a five-year
trailing average of sectoral gross output growth), and
the five-year change in final imports as a share of
gross output.
​​Zjt​ ​​​includes measures that vary only at the country
level, such as the aggregate output gap and (lagged)
inflation, the change in the relative price of investment, and measures of worker bargaining power
(proxied again using the five-year change in the union
density rate). To exploit sectoral variation in exposure
to aggregate forces, these are interacted with sectoral characteristics, looking at the interaction of the
aggregate output gap with the correlation of the sector
and the aggregate economy and the interaction of the

change in the relative price of investment with sectoral
capital intensity.
As in the aggregate regressions, the sectoral analysis
relates the share of part-time employment to slack
(captured using the output gap and how correlated a
sector is with the aggregate economy and the interaction between these two variables) and to secular
drivers: expected growth, change in final imports as a
share of gross output, change in the relative price of
investment (also interacted with capital intensity), and
change in the union density rate.

Annex 2.3. Empirical Results
Aggregate Analysis
Annex Tables 2.3.1 and 2.3.2 show estimates of
wage Phillips curves using ordinary least squares and
instrumental variables estimations, for the full sample
as well as a sample excluding the Baltic countries, and
for alternative measures of the dependent and explanatory variables.

Annex Table 2.3.1. Estimates of Wage Phillips Curves
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

All Advanced
Economies

Unemployment Rate
Change in Unemployment Rate
Lagged Inflation

OLS

OLS

–0.332***
(0.0261)
–0.114***
(0.0381)
0.215***
(0.0438)

–0.366***
(0.0257)
–0.0836**
(0.0373)
0.161***
(0.0431)
0.697***
(0.0725)

yes
yes

yes
yes

Trend Productivity Growth Rate3
First-Stage F-statistics above 10
Country Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

Country-byCountry
IV1
OLS2
–0.394*** –0.464
(0.0284)
–0.124*** 0.00042
(0.0419)
0.291*** 0.177
(0.110)
0.922*** 0.344
(0.0732)
yes
yes
no

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

All Advanced Economies
Excluding Baltic Countries
Country-byCountry
OLS
OLS
IV1
OLS2
–0.261*** –0.281*** –0.338*** –0.428
(0.0249) (0.0249) (0.0279)
–0.0386
–0.0111
–0.00301
0.0313
(0.0427) (0.0425) (0.0474)
0.216*** 0.190*** 0.235**
0.187
(0.0435) (0.0432) (0.112)
0.446*** 0.778***
0.261
(0.0729) (0.0742)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no

Number of Observations
1,889
1,889
1,857
1,766
1,766
1,736
R2
0.472
0.498
0.478
0.438
0.450
0.419
Memorandum:
The coefficient of trend productivity growth rate implied from other studies: 0.781.4
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Dependent variable = year-over-year growth rate of compensation per hour of workers excluding the self-employed. Sample is of quarterly frequency
from the first quarter of 2000 to the fourth quarter of 2016. See Annex Table 2.1.1 for countries in the sample. IV = instrumental variable. OLS = ordinary
least squares. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
1The instrumental variable for lagged inflation is the two-quarter-lagged change in oil price.
2Averages of the estimates of country-specific wage Phillips curves.
3Five-year trailing average of the labor productivity growth rate.
4Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

103

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Annex Table 2.3.2. Estimates of Wage Phillips Curves with Alternative Measures
(1)

(2)

(3)

Benchmark1

Alternative
Measure of
Labor Market
Slack3

Alternative
Measure of
Inflation
Expectations4

IV2

IV2
–0.220***
(0.0236)

IV2
–0.347***
(0.0296)

IV2
–0.339***
(0.0287)

–0.0935***
(0.0397)
0.735***
(0.0594)
0.265***
(0.0594)
0.553***
(0.0634)

–0.00512
(0.0479)
0.302***
(0.117)

0.0240
(0.0447)
0.196*
(0.108)

IV2
–0.339***
(0.0291)

Unemployment Rate
Output Gap
Change in Unemployment Rate
Lagged Inflation

0.0244
(0.0480)
0.195
(0.120)

0.291***
(0.0331)
0.0279
(0.0502)
0.149
(0.128)

0.783***
(0.0720)

0.645***
(0.0727)

Ten-Year Inflation Expectation
Trend Productivity Growth Rate: Five-year7
Trend Productivity Growth Rate: Three-year8
First-Stage F-statistics above 10
Country Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

(4)

(5)

Alternative
Restricting the
Measure of Trend Coefficient of
Productivity
Trend Productivity
Growth5
Growth6

0.781
0.410***
(0.0692)
yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

Number of Observations
1,656
1,656
1,656
1,656
1,656
R2
0.406
0.369
0.379
0.396
0.284
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Dependent variable = year-over-year growth rate of compensation per hour of workers excluding the self-employed. Sample is of quarterly frequency
from the first quarter of 2000 to the fourth quarter of 2016. See Annex Table 2.1.1 for countries in the sample. IV = instrumental variable. Standard errors in
parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
1The sample size is slightly smaller than that in Annex Table 2.3.1, as this table ensures the sample size consistency for columns (1) to (5).
2The instrumental variable for lagged inflation is the two-quarter-lagged change in oil price.
3Output gap replaces unemployment rate as the measure of the labor market slack.
4Lagged inflation is replaced by lagged inflation and 10-year inflation expectation, with the sum of the two coefficients assumed to be 1.
5Three-year trailing average of productivity growth replaces five-year trailing average of productivity growth.
6The coefficient of trend productivity growth is imposed to be 0.781, to address the reverse causality from wage growth to trend productivity growth.
7Five-year trailing average of labor productivity growth rate.
8Three-year trailing average of labor productivity growth rate.

Oil price changes are common across countries, so
instrumental variables results do not control for year
fixed effects. The main results are not sensitive to the
choice of estimation method—ordinary least squares
including year fixed effects or instrumental variables
without year fixed effects (Annex Figure 2.3.1 compared with Figure 2.12). The share of variation in wage
growth explained by inflation drivers is broadly similar
across the two approaches.44
Annex Tables 2.3.3–2.3.5 augment the wage Phillips
curve specification in Annex Table 2.3.1 further with
the share of involuntary part-time employment, and
44Further analysis relating the residuals from the wage Phillips
curve analysis to the global output gap (weighted by dollar GDP)
suggests that the global output gap is not significant in explaining
such residuals.

104

examine robustness to using different measures of
wages, as well as exploring differences across countries
with unemployment rates below, moderately above,
and appreciably above 2000–07 averages.
Annex Tables 2.3.6 and 2.3.7 conduct a similar
exercise for the temporary contract employment
share instead of involuntary part-time employment
share. Results are very similar if both the involuntary
part-time employment share and temporary contract
employment share are controlled for simultaneously.
These labor market underutilization measures do
not appear to affect the sensitivity of wage growth
to unemployment rates—they are thus included
additively.
As described above, Annex Table 2.3.8 augments the
wage Phillips curve with secular drivers. Because wage

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

growth rates were volatile during the Great Recession,
Annex Table 2.3.9 examines robustness to excluding
the years 2008 and 2009.
Annex Table 2.3.10 zooms in on the determinants
of job attributes and examines the drivers of involuntary part-time employment, linking it to the output
gap and the secular drivers explored above.

Annex Figure 2.3.1. Decomposition of Wage Dynamics,
2000–16
(Percentage-point change relative to 2000–07 average)
Lagged inﬂation
Trend productivity growth
Conventional labor market indicators
Involuntary part-time employment share
2

Sectoral Analysis

1

Sectoral data have many more missing observations
than country-level data, resulting in an unbalanced
panel, and sectoral measurements are likely noisier. Although the results of the sectoral regressions
are not as conclusive as those based on the country
panel regressions presented earlier, they tend to
be consistent.
Annex Tables 2.3.11 and 2.3.12 report the results
of the sectoral analysis, linking growth in nominal
wages and part-time employment to cyclical and
secular drivers. These include country, sector, and year
fixed effects—results are robust to including interacted
sector-year fixed effects instead, which would pick
up common sectoral developments across countries.
Diminished sector-specific slack is associated with
higher nominal wage growth in countries where
unemployment in 2016 was below 2000–07 averages
(as captured by the sum of the impacts of the aggregate output gap, the correlation between the sector
and the aggregate economy, and their interaction; see
Figure 2.3.2, panel 1). Automation and medium-term
growth expectations have been generally associated
with lower wage growth in these economies. Where
unemployment rates are still appreciably above
2000–07 averages, slack and past inflation are the
largest drags on nominal wage growth (Figure 2.3.2,
panel 3). For countries with unemployment rates
only moderately above their former averages, structural factors—automation and medium-term growth
expectations—play a role (Figure 2.3.2, panel 2).
Although sectoral productivity growth does not have
a significant effect in the sectoral analysis, this finding
could result from spillovers of wage pressures across
sectors and cross-sector labor mobility. These spillovers
tend to weaken links between sector-level drivers and
sectoral nominal wage growth.
Automation and lower sectoral medium-term
growth expectations are also associated with higher
shares of part-time employment across sectors,

0

Year ﬁxed effects
Residual
Actual wage growth

1. Unemployment Rates Lower than 2000–07 Average

–1
–2
–3
1

2000–07

08–12

13

14

15

16

2. Unemployment Rates Moderately Higher than 2000–07 Average

0
–1
–2
–3

2

2000–07

08–12

13

14

15

16

3. Unemployment Rates Appreciably Higher than 2000–07 Average

1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4

2000–07

08–12

13

14

15

16

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The wage variable used is compensation per hour of workers excluding the
self-employed. Involuntary part-time workers are those working less than 30 hours
a week because they could not ﬁnd a full-time position. The involuntary part-time
employment share is calculated as the total number of involuntary part-time
workers divided by total employment. Groups are as deﬁned in Figure 2.11. The
decomposition is based on the coefﬁcients reported in column (1) of Annex Table
2.3.3 and is weighted by GDP at market exchange rates across countries.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

105

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Annex Table 2.3.3. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Involuntary Part-Time Employment
Share by Country Group

Involuntary Part-Time
Employment Share
Unemployment Rate
Change in Unemployment Rate
Lagged Inflation
Trend Productivity Growth Rate2
First-Stage F-statistics above 10
Country Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Full Sample

Group A

Group B

Group C

Full Sample

Group A

Group B

Group C

OLS
–0.336**
(0.139)
–0.00699
(0.186)
–0.609**
(0.271)
–0.183
(0.124)
–0.131
(0.189)
yes
yes
yes

OLS
0.0159
(0.124)
–0.280***
(0.0686)
–0.128
(0.129)
0.156
(0.206)
0.699***
(0.170)
yes
yes
yes

OLS
OLS
–0.177** –0.503*
(0.0830)
(0.274)
–0.187*** –0.0178
(0.0445)
(0.128)
–0.349*** –0.690***
(0.0960)
(0.244)
0.193*** 0.378***
(0.0728)
(0.129)
0.456*** 0.634*
(0.112)
(0.348)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

IV1
IV1
IV1
IV1
–0.275*** –0.653** –0.291*
–0.186*
(0.0829)
(0.294)
(0.154)
(0.101)
–0.182*** 0.0855
–0.284
–0.395***
(0.0438)
(0.146)
(0.186)
(0.0722)
–0.263*** –0.449** –0.830*** 0.0821
(0.0887)
(0.181)
(0.247)
(0.117)
0.300*
0.287
0.397
–0.279
(0.164)
(0.282)
(0.248)
(0.292)
0.624*** 0.763*** 0.00955
0.986***
(0.106)
(0.223)
(0.176)
(0.170)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
no
no
no

Number of Observations
411
117
146
148
411
117
146
148
R2
0.610
0.709
0.649
0.723
0.577
0.652
0.458
0.660
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Dependent variable = annual growth rates of compensation per hour of workers excluding the self-employed. Sample is of annual frequency from
2000 to 2016. See Annex Table 2.1.1. for countries in the full sample. A few countries are not in the sample due to missing data on involuntary part-time
employment share. Country groups are divided by comparing unemployment rate in 2016 with 2000–07 average. Group A (2016 unemployment lower than
2000–07): Czech Republic, Germany, Japan, Israel, Slovak Republic, United Kingdom, and United States. Group B (2016 unemployment moderately higher
than 2000–07): Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Switzerland, Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden. Group C (2016 unemployment appreciably higher
than 2000–07): Denmark, Spain, France, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, and Slovenia. IV = instrumental variable. OLS = ordinary least squares.
Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
1The instrumental variable for lagged inflation is the two-quarter-lagged change in oil price.
2Five-year trailing average of the labor productivity growth rate.

Annex Table 2.3.4. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Involuntary Part-Time Employment
Share: Full Sample and Countries with Unemployment Rates Lower than 2000–07 Average
(1)

(2)

(3)

Full Sample
Compensation Compensation
per Employee1
per Hour1
Involuntary Part-Time
Employment Share
Unemployment Rate
Change in Unemployment Rate
Lagged Inflation
Trend Productivity Growth Rate3
First-Stage F-statistics above 10
Country Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

IV2
–0.203**
(0.0803)
–0.167***
(0.0424)
–0.473***
(0.0859)
0.509***
(0.159)
0.413***
(0.103)
yes
yes
no

IV2
–0.275***
(0.0829)
–0.182***
(0.0438)
–0.263***
(0.0887)
0.300*
(0.164)
0.624***
(0.106)
yes
yes
no

(4)

(5)

(6)

Countries with Unemployment Rate Lower
than 2000–07 Average (Group A)
Wage
per Hour1

Compensation
per Employee1

Compensation
per Hour1

Wage
per Hour1

IV2
–0.242***
(0.0805)
–0.177***
(0.0422)
–0.321***
(0.0853)
0.309*
(0.162)
0.701***
(0.102)
yes
yes
no

IV2
–0.535**
(0.261)
–0.0174
(0.130)
–0.574***
(0.161)
0.491*
(0.250)
0.659***
(0.198)
yes
yes
no

IV2
–0.653**
(0.294)
0.0855
(0.146)
–0.449**
(0.181)
0.287
(0.282)
0.763***
(0.223)
yes
yes
no

IV2
–0.705**
(0.292)
0.103
(0.145)
–0.567***
(0.180)
0.253
(0.279)
0.760***
(0.222)
yes
yes
no

Number of Observations
411
411
410
117
117
117
R2
0.570
0.577
0.603
0.705
0.652
0.663
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Sample is of annual frequency from 2000 to 2016. See the notes in Annex Table 2.3.3 for countries in the full sample and group A. IV = instrumental
variable. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
1The dependent variable of the regression, defined as annual growth rates.
2The instrumental variable for lagged inflation is the two-quarter-lagged change in oil price.
3Five-year trailing average of the labor productivity growth rate.

106

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

Annex Table 2.3.5. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Involuntary Part-Time Employment
Share: Countries with Unemployment Rates Moderately Higher and Appreciably Higher than 2000–07 Average
(1)

(2)

(3)

Countries with Unemployment Rates Moderately
Higher than 2000–07 Average (Group B)

Involuntary Part-Time
Employment Share
Unemployment Rate
Change in Unemployment Rate
Lagged Inflation
Trend Productivity Growth Rate3
First-Stage F-statistics above 10
Country Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

(4)

(5)

(6)

Countries with Unemployment Rates Appreciably
Higher than 2000–07 Average (Group C)

Compensation
per Employee1

Compensation
per Hour1

Wage
per Hour1

Compensation
per Employee1

Compensation
per Hour1

Wage
per Hour1

IV2
–0.221
(0.147)
–0.203
(0.177)
–1.429***
(0.235)
0.522**
(0.236)
–0.183
(0.168)
yes
yes
no

IV2
–0.291*
(0.154)
–0.284
(0.186)
–0.830***
(0.247)
0.397
(0.248)
0.00955
(0.176)
yes
yes
no

IV2
–0.110
(0.147)
–0.147
(0.187)
–0.743***
(0.241)
0.780***
(0.259)
0.0518
(0.167)
yes
yes
no

IV2
–0.157*
(0.0923)
–0.358***
(0.0663)
–0.0369
(0.107)
–0.126
(0.268)
0.834***
(0.156)
yes
yes
no

IV2
–0.186*
(0.101)
–0.395***
(0.0722)
0.0821
(0.117)
–0.279
(0.292)
0.986***
(0.170)
yes
yes
no

IV2
–0.235**
(0.105)
–0.375***
(0.0751)
–0.0381
(0.121)
–0.369
(0.304)
1.082***
(0.177)
yes
yes
no

Number of Observations
146
146
145
148
148
148
R2
0.487
0.458
0.389
0.681
0.660
0.652
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Sample is of annual frequency from 2000 to 2016. See the notes in Annex Table 2.3.3 for countries in groups B and C. IV = instrumental variable.
Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
1The dependent variable of the regression, defined as annual growth rates.
2The instrumental variable for lagged inflation is the two-quarter-lagged change in oil price.
3Five-year trailing average of the labor productivity growth rate.

Annex Table 2.3.6. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Temporary Contract Employment
Share: Full Sample and Countries with Unemployment Rates Lower than 2000–07 Average
(1)

(2)

(3)

Full Sample

Temporary Contract
Employment Share
Unemployment Rate
Change in Unemployment Rate
Lagged Inflation
Trend Productivity Growth Rate3
First-Stage F-statistics above 10
Country Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

(4)

(5)

(6)

Countries with Unemployment Rate Lower than
2000–07 Average (Group A)

Compensation
per Employee1

Compensation
per Hour1

Wage
per Hour1

Compensation
per Employee1

Compensation
per Hour1

Wage
per Hour1

IV2
–0.0274
(0.0566)
–0.244***
(0.0428)
–0.428***
(0.0974)
0.556***
(0.182)
0.503***
(0.118)
yes
yes
no

IV2
–0.0866
(0.0584)
–0.297***
(0.0441)
–0.181*
(0.100)
0.259
(0.188)
0.736***
(0.122)
yes
yes
no

IV2
–0.0861
(0.0561)
–0.277***
(0.0427)
–0.249***
(0.0960)
0.281
(0.183)
0.806***
(0.116)
yes
yes
no

IV2
0.0498
(0.135)
–0.0666
(0.219)
–0.392*
(0.203)
0.431
(0.430)
0.987***
(0.195)
yes
yes
no

IV2
–0.115
(0.174)
0.262
(0.281)
–0.291
(0.261)
–0.167
(0.553)
1.130***
(0.251)
yes
yes
no

IV2
–0.146
(0.176)
0.308
(0.285)
–0.375
(0.265)
–0.249
(0.561)
1.133***
(0.254)
yes
yes
no

Number of Observations
388
388
387
88
88
88
R2
0.617
0.616
0.648
0.732
0.591
0.575
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Sample is of annual frequency from 2000 to 2016. See the notes in Annex Table 2.3.3 for countries in the full sample and group A. IV = instrumental
variable. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
1The dependent variable of the regression, defined as annual growth rates.
2The instrumental variable for lagged inflation is the two-quarter-lagged change in oil price.
3Five-year trailing average of the labor productivity growth rate.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

107

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Annex Table 2.3.7. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Temporary Contract
Employment Share: Countries with Unemployment Rates Moderately Higher and Appreciably
Higher than 2000–07 Average
(1)

(2)

(3)

Countries with Unemployment Rate Moderately
Higher than 2000–07 Average (Group B)

Temporary Contract Employment
Share
Unemployment Rate
Change in Unemployment Rate
Lagged Inflation
Trend Productivity Growth Rate3
First-Stage F-statistics above 10
Country Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

(4)

(5)

(6)

Countries with Unemployment Rate Appreciably
Higher than 2000–07 Average (Group C)

Compensation
per Employee1

Compensation
per Hour1

Wage
per Hour1

Compensation
per Employee1

Compensation
per Hour1

Wage
per Hour1

IV2
–0.0416
(0.0987)
–0.489***
(0.153)
–1.227***
(0.249)
0.384
(0.274)
0.0832
(0.158)
yes
yes
no

IV2
–0.158
(0.102)
–0.446***
(0.158)
–0.636**
(0.257)
0.128
(0.283)
0.303*
(0.163)
yes
yes
no

IV2
–0.138
(0.0975)
–0.383**
(0.153)
–0.610**
(0.250)
0.563*
(0.293)
0.277*
(0.155)
yes
yes
no

IV2
–0.106
(0.0818)
–0.383***
(0.0699)
–0.0615
(0.117)
0.0161
(0.272)
0.862***
(0.190)
yes
yes
no

IV2
–0.107
(0.0875)
–0.426***
(0.0748)
0.0538
(0.126)
–0.104
(0.291)
1.000***
(0.204)
yes
yes
no

IV2
–0.101
(0.0919)
–0.411***
(0.0786)
–0.0717
(0.132)
–0.132
(0.306)
1.097***
(0.214)
yes
yes
no

Number of Observations
147
147
146
153
153
153
R2
0.607
0.582
0.564
0.667
0.647
0.637
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Sample is of annual frequency from 2000 to 2016. See the notes of Annex Table 2.3.3 for countries in groups B and C. IV = instrumental variable.
Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
1The dependent variable of the regression, defined as annual growth rates.
2The instrumental variable for lagged inflation is the two-quarter-lagged change in oil price.
3Five-year trailing average of the labor productivity growth rate.

and the associations are broadly similar in size to
those found in the aggregate analysis for involuntary part-time employment (Figure 2.3.3; Annex
Table 2.3.12).
Annex Table 2.3.13 reports the robustness test in
which growth in nominal wages, employment, and
part-time employment are treated as jointly determined and estimates the system using three-stage
least squares, which treats the dependent variables as
endogenous, instruments them using the exogenous
variables, and allows them to be correlated with disturbances in the system’s equations.
The results are also robust to looking at three-year
nonoverlapping averages of the dependent and explanatory variables instead of annual data. Furthermore, as
in the aggregate analysis, results are robust to omitting
smaller advanced economies (the Baltic countries).

108

While skill composition is not included in the baseline
specifications due to data limitations, the results are
robust to including it as an additional control.
Further robustness tests have explored alternative
trade measures, such as exports and intermediate
exports as a share of gross output and global value
chain participation, aggregate expected growth (one
and five years ahead) interacted with sectoral correlation instead of sectoral expected growth, and further
measures of worker bargaining power. Such further
measures include whether the country has a bi- or
tripartite agreement, whether bargaining is done
predominantly by firms (as opposed to at the sector or
country level), the ease of hiring and firing, and the
strictness of employment protection regulation. Results
on other variables are broadly comparable to those in
the baseline regressions.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

Annex Table 2.3.8. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Structural Variables

Involuntary Part-Time
Employment Share
Unemployment Rate
Change in Unemployment Rate
Lagged Inflation
Trend Productivity Growth Rate

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

IV1
–0.275***
(0.0829)
–0.182***
(0.0438)
–0.263***
(0.0887)
0.300*
(0.164)
0.624***
(0.106)

IV1
–0.306***
(0.0947)
–0.226***
(0.0556)
–0.225**
(0.0969)
–0.0452
(0.280)
0.720***
(0.118)
0.0944**
(0.0424)

IV1
–0.192**
(0.0845)
–0.211***
(0.0492)
–0.137
(0.0833)
0.00644
(0.197)
0.845***
(0.109)

IV1
–0.200**
(0.0976)
–0.293***
(0.0688)
–0.284***
(0.109)
–0.380
(0.311)
0.497***
(0.123)

IV1
–0.166*
(0.0977)
–0.365***
(0.0590)
–0.0325
(0.0887)
–0.236
(0.206)
0.594***
(0.117)

IV1
–0.225***
(0.0794)
–0.199***
(0.0444)
–0.247***
(0.0893)
0.199
(0.186)
0.570***
(0.101)

IV1
–0.272***
(0.0830)
–0.177***
(0.0446)
–0.267***
(0.0887)
0.308*
(0.164)
0.628***
(0.107)

IV1
–0.0840
(0.133)
–0.333***
(0.0948)
–0.295**
(0.130)
–0.432
(0.332)
0.231
(0.168)

IV1
–0.0570
(0.125)
–0.362***
(0.0902)
–0.334***
(0.123)
–0.540
(0.327)
0.325**
(0.156)

Change in Foreign Value Added as
a Share of Exports2
Change in the Relative Price of
Investment2
Change in the Union Density
Rate2
Change in Individual and Collective
Dismissal Regulation2
Expected Growth

0.114***
(0.0302)
–0.330***
(0.0774)

–0.340***
(0.0774)
–0.259
(0.918)
0.459**
(0.180)

Change in the Share of Service
Sector Workers2
Union Density Rate (Level)
First-Stage F-statistics above 10
Country Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

–0.0194
(0.0327)

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

0.322***
(0.0836)
yes
yes
no

0.186***
(0.0678)
yes
yes
no

Number of Observations
411
361
316
288
247
411
411
267
264
R2
0.577
0.561
0.596
0.590
0.603
0.589
0.578
0.501
0.567
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Dependent variable = annual growth rates of compensation per hour of workers excluding the self-employed. Sample is of annual frequency from 2000 to 2016.
See Annex Table 2.1.1 for countries in the sample. IV = instrumental variable. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
1The instrumental variable for lagged inflation is the two-quarter-lagged change in oil price.
2Relative to five years ago.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

109

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Annex Table 2.3.9. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Structural Variables: Excluding 2008
and 2009

Involuntary Part-Time
Employment Share
Unemployment Rate
Change in Unemployment Rate
Lagged Inflation
Trend Productivity Growth Rate

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

IV1
–0.213**
(0.0912)
–0.174***
(0.0428)
–0.400***
(0.118)
0.502**
(0.208)
0.768***
(0.101)

IV1
–0.227
(0.139)
–0.205***
(0.0657)
–0.321*
(0.183)
0.351
(0.598)
0.826***
(0.118)
0.0262
(0.0452)

IV1
–0.168*
(0.102)
–0.186***
(0.0549)
–0.280**
(0.131)
0.180
(0.346)
0.891***
(0.120)

IV1
–0.215*
(0.123)
–0.301***
(0.105)
–0.308*
(0.168)
–0.583
(1.107)
0.471***
(0.154)

IV1
–0.193
(0.131)
–0.319***
(0.0768)
–0.129
(0.152)
–0.254
(0.677)
0.662***
(0.130)

IV1
–0.173**
(0.0862)
–0.196***
(0.0446)
–0.352***
(0.127)
0.354
(0.251)
0.721***
(0.0968)

IV1
–0.205**
(0.0913)
–0.162***
(0.0435)
–0.406***
(0.118)
0.520**
(0.207)
0.779***
(0.101)

IV1
–0.212
(0.198)
–0.367
(0.230)
–0.495**
(0.229)
–1.289
(2.101)
–0.0674
(0.662)

IV1
–0.169
(0.178)
–0.380*
(0.227)
–0.507**
(0.213)
–1.417
(2.053)
0.151
(0.466)

Change in Foreign Value Added as
a Share of Exports2
Change in Relative Price of
Investment2
Change in Union Density Rate2

0.0911***
(0.0338)
–0.390*
(0.234)

–0.483
(0.373)
–0.390
(1.653)

Change in Individual and Collective
Dismissal Regulation2
Expected Growth

0.414**
(0.197)

Change in Share of Service Sector
Workers2
Union Density Rate (Level)
First-Stage F-statistics above 10
Country Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

–0.0424
(0.0308)

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

0.542
(0.510)
yes
yes
no

0.302
(0.302)
yes
yes
no

Number of Observations
361
311
274
241
203
361
361
221
219
R2
0.678
0.676
0.654
0.612
0.632
0.682
0.680
0.264
0.369
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Dependent variable = annual growth rates of compensation per hour of workers excluding the self-employed. Sample is of annual frequency from 2000 to 2016.
See Annex Table 2.1.1 for countries in the sample. IV = instrumental variable. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
1The instrumental variable for lagged inflation is the two-quarter-lagged change in oil price.
2Relative to five years ago.

Annex Table 2.3.10. Drivers of Involuntary Part-Time Employment Share, Aggregate Analysis
(1)
–0.265***
(0.030)

Output Gap
Expected Growth

(2)
–0.263***
(0.029)
–0.454***
(0.134)

(4)
–0.238***
(0.031)

(5)
–0.172***
(0.033)

(6)
–0.245***
(0.030)

–0.122***
(0.018)

Change in Relative Price of
Investment1
Change in Foreign Value Added
as a Share of Exports1
Change in Union Density Rate1
Change in Share of Service
Sector Workers1
Country Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

(3)
–0.172***
(0.029)

0.037
(0.033)
0.007
(0.028)

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

0.085***
(0.023)
yes
yes

Number of Observations
386
386
357
361
288
386
R2
0.447
0.465
0.548
0.447
0.474
0.467
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Dependent variable = involuntary part-time employment share in logs. Sample is of annual frequency from 2000 to 2016. See Annex Table 2.1.1 for
countries in the sample. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
1Relative to five years ago.

110

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

Annex Table 2.3.11. Drivers of Sectoral Nominal Wage Growth

Aggregate Output Gap
Correlation of Sectoral and Aggregate Output Growth
Aggregate Output Gap × Correlation
Lagged Inflation
Trend Productivity Growth Rate1
Part-Time Employment Share
Expected Growth (Sectoral)
Change in Final Imports as a Share of Gross Output2
Change in Relative Price of Investment2
Country Fixed Effects
Sector Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

(1)

(2)

(3)

Group A
–0.221**
(0.0750)
0.321
(1.077)
–0.183
(0.138)
0.182
(0.295)
–0.0229
(0.0889)
0.0215
(0.0254)
0.189*
(0.0716)
0.0943
(0.0494)
0.256**
(0.0861)
yes
yes
yes

Group B
0.0417
(0.119)
–0.599
(0.606)
–0.123
(0.102)
0.304
(0.216)
–0.0387
(0.0286)
–0.00107
(0.0193)
0.134**
(0.0483)
0.0213
(0.0384)
0.0701
(0.0369)
yes
yes
yes

Group C
0.177*
(0.0867)
0.179
(0.310)
0.319*
(0.158)
0.492**
(0.195)
–0.00741
(0.0306)
0.00870
(0.00999)
0.0135
(0.0256)
0.0209
(0.0262)
–0.0215
(0.0427)
yes
yes
yes

Number of Observations
349
447
493
R2
0.400
0.111
0.355
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Dependent variable = year-over-year percent change in nominal wages and salaries per worker (excludes self-employment and employers’ social contributions) for NACE revision 2 sectors. NACE = Statistical Classification of Economic Activities in the European Community. Sample is of annual frequency
from 2000 to 2015. See notes for Annex Table 2.3.3 for countries in different groups. The following countries are absent in respective groups due to data
constraints: Japan (A), Israel (A), Iceland (B), Switzerland (B), and Greece (C). Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
1Five-year trailing average of the labor productivity growth rate.
2Relative to five years ago.

Annex Table 2.3.12. Drivers of Sectoral Part-Time Employment Shares
Aggregate Output Gap
Correlation of Sectoral and Aggregate
Output Growth
Aggregate Output Gap × Correlation

(1)
–0.0273
(0.0710)
–0.318
(0.512)
–0.0703
(0.0739)

Expected Growth (Aggregate)

(2)
–0.00807
(0.0685)
–0.355
(0.514)
–0.0779
(0.0727)
–0.615*
(0.322)

(3)
0.0237
(0.0736)
–0.321
(0.454)
–0.115
(0.0788)

(4)
0.00105
(0.0781)
–0.290
(0.478)
–0.0297
(0.0686)

(5)
0.0124
(0.0595)
0.254
(0.479)
–0.0204
(0.0924)

–0.137**
(0.0573)

Expected Growth (Sectoral)

–0.0577
(0.0367)

Change in Final Imports as a Share of
Gross Output1
Change in Relative Price of Investment1

–0.147***
(0.0464)
0.00118**
(0.000419)
5.052
(4.032)

Change in Relative Price of Investment ×
Capital Intensity
Capital Intensity
Change in Union Density Rate1
Country Fixed Effects
Sector Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

(6)
–0.00168
(0.0830)
–0.441
(0.773)
0.0285
(0.0831)

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

0.106
(0.0749)
yes
yes
yes

Number of Observations
2,103
2,103
2,103
1,687
1,710
1,562
R2
0.806
0.806
0.807
0.811
0.810
0.824
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Dependent variable = part-time employment shares for NACE revision 2 sectors. NACE = Statistical Classification of Economic Activities in the European Community. Sample is of annual frequency from 2000 to 2015. See Annex Table 2.1.1 for countries in the sample. Standard errors in parentheses.
* p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
1Relative to five years ago.
111
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Annex Figure 2.3.2. Decomposition of Sectoral Wage
Dynamics, 2000–15

Annex Figure 2.3.3. Effects on Part-Time Employment Share,
Sectoral Analysis

(Percentage-point change relative to 2000–07 average)
Actual
Lagged inﬂation

Slack
Structural factors

(Percentage points)

Year ﬁxed effects
Residual

0.4
0.2

4

1. Unemployment Rates Lower than 2000–07 Average

0.0

2

–0.2

0

–0.4

–2

–0.6

–4

–0.8

–6

2000–07

08–12

13

14

15

–1.0
–1.2

2

2. Unemployment Rates Moderately Higher than 2000–07 Average
–1.4

1
0
–1
–2
–3

5.0

2000–07

08–12

13

14

15

Five-year
percentagepoint change
in ﬁnal imports
(sectoral)

Five-year
Five-year
percentage- percentagepoint change point change
in price of
in union
investment density rate
(aggregate) (aggregate)

3. Unemployment Rates Appreciably Higher than 2000–07 Average

0.0
–2.5
–5.0
2000–07

08–12

13

14

15

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Groups are as deﬁned in Figure 2.11. Structural factors include automation
(proxied by the relative price of investment), trade, and expected growth.
Regressions also control for trend labor productivity growth, the share of part-time
employment, as well as country and sector ﬁxed effects. The decomposition is
based on the coefﬁcients reported in Annex Table 2.3.11 and is weighted by GDP
at market exchange rates across countries. Only statistically signiﬁcant
coefﬁcients are shown.

112

Percent
increase in
expected
growth
(sectoral)

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Markers show estimated coefﬁcients, and lines display 90 percent
conﬁdence intervals. Figure is based on columns (2) to (6) of Annex Table 2.3.12.

2.5

–7.5

Percent
increase in
expected
growth
(aggregate)

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

Annex Table 2.3.13. Drivers of Nominal Wage Growth, Employment Growth, and Part-Time Employment
(1)

(2)

(3)

Nominal Wage Growth1
Aggregate Output gap
Correlation of Sectoral and Aggregate
Output Growth
Aggregate Output Gap × Correlation
Lagged Inflation
Expected Growth (Sectoral)
Change in Final Imports as a Share of
Gross Output4
Change in the Relative Price of Investment4
Country Fixed Effects
Sector Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

3SLS2

3SLS3

0.284***
(0.0334)
–0.388**
(0.172)
0.321***
(0.0548)
0.207***
(0.0573)
0.0205
(0.0138)
–0.0103
(0.0110)
0.102***
(0.0228)
yes
yes
no

0.241***
(0.0322)
–0.412**
(0.163)
0.269***
(0.0531)
0.210***
(0.0578)
0.0226*
(0.0137)
–0.00520
(0.00973)
0.115***
(0.0213)
yes
yes
no

(4)

Employment Growth1
3SLS2
–0.0682
(0.0786)
–1.001**
(0.404)
0.606***
(0.129)
0.0552
(0.135)
–0.0700**
(0.0324)
0.0280
(0.0258)
0.0294
(0.0537)
yes
yes
no

3SLS3
–0.0513
(0.0641)
–0.226
(0.324)
0.644***
(0.106)
–0.0967
(0.115)
–0.0337
(0.0272)
0.0218
(0.0194)
0.0133
(0.0424)
yes
yes
no

(5)
Part-Time
Employment1
3SLS3
–0.0907
(0.0816)
–0.698*
(0.413)
0.000166
(0.135)
0.131
(0.147)
–0.106***
(0.0347)
0.0588**
(0.0247)
–0.0683
(0.0540)
yes
yes
no

Number of Observations
1,833
1,526
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Sample is of annual frequency from 2000 to 2015. See Annex Table 2.1.1 for countries in the sample. 3SLS = three-stage least squares. Standard errors
in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
1The dependent variable of the regression, defined as annual growth rates and share of total employment.
2System estimated using 3SLS for nominal wage growth and employment growth as the endogenous dependent variables.
3System estimated using 3SLS for nominal wage growth, employment growth, and the share of part-time employment as the endogenous dependent
variables.
4Relative to five years ago.

References
Aaronson, Daniel, and Andrew Jordan. 2014. “Understanding
the Relationship between Real Wage Growth and Labor
Market Conditions.” Chicago Fed Letter 327. Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago.
Adler, Gustavo, Romain Duval, Davide Furceri, Sinem Kiliç Çelik,
Ksenia Koloskova, and Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro. 2017.
“Gone with the Headwinds: Global Productivity.” IMF
Staff Discussion Note 17/04, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, Bruno Laranjeira, and Scott
Weisbenner. 2012. “Corporate Debt Maturity and the Real
Effects of the 2007 Credit Crisis.” Critical Finance Review
1 (1): 3–58.
Altig, David E., and P. Higgins. 2014. “The Wrong Question?”
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Macroblog, June 20.
Aoyagi, Chie, and Giovanni Ganelli. 2015. “Does Revamping
Japan’s Dual Labor Market Matter?” Economic Systems 39
(2): 339–57.
Autor, David H. 2017. “How Long Has This Been Going On?
A discussion of “Recent Flattening in the Higher Education Wage Premium: Polarization, Skill Downgrading, or

Both?” by Robert G. Valletta. National Bureau of Economic
Research, Conference on Research and Income in Wealth.
Autor, David H., and David Dorn. 2013. “The Growth of
Low-Skill Services Jobs and the Polarization of the US Labor
Market.” American Economic Review 103 (5): 1553–97.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney.
2008. “Trends in US Wage Inequality: Revising the Revisionists.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (2): 300–23.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger. 1998.
“Computing Inequality: Have Computers Changed the Labor
Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113: 1169–215.
Ball, Laurence, and Robert Moffitt. 2001. “Productivity Growth
and the Phillips Curve.” Economics Working Paper Archive
450, Johns Hopkins University Department of Economics,
Baltimore, MD.
Beaudry, Paul, David A. Green, and Benjamin M. Sand. 2014.
“The Declining Fortunes of the Young since 2000.” American
Economic Review 104 (5): 381–86.
———. 2016. “The Great Reversal in the Demand for Skill
and Cognitive Tasks.” Journal of Labor Economics 34 (S1,
Part 2): S199–247.
Bentolila, Samuel, Pierre Cahuc, Juan J. Dolado, and Thomas
Le Barbanchon. 2012. “Two-Tier Labor Markets in the

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

113

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Great Recession: France versus Spain.” The Economic Journal,
122, F155–F187.
Berman Eli, John Bound, and Zvi Griliches. 1994. “Changes
in the Demand for Skilled Labor within US Manufacturing:
Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufacturers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (2): 367–97.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Francesco Giavazzi. 2003. “Macroeconomic Effects of Regulation and Deregulation in Goods
and Labor Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118
(3): 879–907.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Lawrence F. Katz, 1997. “Wage Dynamics: Reconciling Theory and Evidence.” American Economic
Review 89 (2): 69–74.
Blanchflower, David G., and Adam S. Posen. 2014. “Wages and
Labor Market Slack: Making the Dual Mandate Operational.”
PIIE Policy Brief 14–10.
Borjas, George J., and Valerie A. Ramey. 1995. “Foreign Competition, Market Power, and Wage Inequality.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 110 (4): 1075–110.
Borowczyk-Martins, Daniel, Gregory Jolivet, and Fabien
Postel-Vinay. 2013. “Accounting for Endogeneity in Matching Function Estimation.” Review of Economic Dynamics 16
(3): 440–51.
Brainard, Lael. 2016. “The ‘Gig’ Economy: Implications of the
Growth of Contingent Work.” Speech at the “Evolution of
Work” conference, November 17. https://​​www​​.federalreserve​​
.gov/​​newsevents/​​speech/​​brainard20161117a​​.htm.
Burda, Michael C., and Stefanie Seele. 2016. “No Role for the
Hartz Reforms? Demand and Supply Factors in the German
Labor Market, 1993–2014.” SFB 649 Discussion Paper
2016–010, Humboldt University, Berlin.
Burtless, Gary. 1995. “International Trade and the Rise in Earnings Inequality.” Journal of Economic Literature 33 (2): 800–16.
Byrne, David M., John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf.
2016. “Does the United States Have a Productivity Slowdown
or a Measurement Problem?” Working Paper Series 2016–3,
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Cho, Sang-Wook (Stanley), and Julían P. Díaz. 2016. “Skill
Premium Divergence: The Roles of Trade, Capital, and
Demographics.” The Future of Europe: Central and Eastern
Europe in a Comparative Perspective conference.
Council of Economic Advisers. 2014. Economic Report of the
President. Washington, DC.
Daly, Mary, and Bart Hobijn. 2015. “Why Is Wage Growth
So Slow?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic
Letter 2015–01, January.
Danninger, Stephan. 2016. “What’s Up with US Wage Growth
and Job Mobility?” IMF Working Paper 16/122, International Monetary Fund, Washington DC.
Das, Mitali, and Benjamin Hilgenstock. Forthcoming. “Labor
Market Consequences of Routinization in Developed and
Developing Economies.” Unpublished.
Davis, Steven J., and John Haltiwanger. 2014. “Labor Market Fluidity and Economic Performance.” NBER Working

114

Paper 20479, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Dew-Becker, Ian, and Robert J. Gordon. 2005. “Where Did
Productivity Growth Go? Inflation Dynamics and the Distribution of Income.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 36
(2): 67–150.
DiNardo, John, and David Card. 2002. “Skill Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage Inequality: Some Problems and
Puzzles.” Journal of Labor Economics 20 (4): 733–83.
Du Caju, Philip, Gábor Kátay, Ana Lamo, Daphne Nicolitsas, and Steven Poelhekke. 2010. “Inter-Industry Wage
Differentials in EU Countries: What Do Cross-Country
Time-Varying Data Add to the Picture?” European Central
Bank Working Paper 189, Frankfurt.
Duval, Romain, Gee Hee Hong, and Yannick Timmer. 2017.
“Financial Frictions and the Great Productivity Slowdown.”
IMF Working Paper 17/129, International Monetary Fund,
Washington DC.
Erdil, Erkan, and I. Hakan Yetkiner. 2001. “A Comparative
Analysis of Inter-Industry Wage Differentials: Industrialized versus Developing Countries.” Applied Economics 33
(13): 1639–48.
European Central Bank (ECB). 2009. “Wage Dynamics in
Europe: Final Report of the Wage Dynamics Network.”
Directorate General Research, Frankfurt.
———. 2017. “Assessing Labor Market Slack.” Economic
Bulletin 3.
European Commission (EC). 2003. “Wage Structures and
Determinants in an Enlarged Europe.” In Employment in
Europe 2003: Recent Trends and Prospects. Directorate-General
for Employment and Social Affairs, Frankfurt.
European Union (EU). 2015. “Wage and Income Inequality
in the European Union.” Directorate-General for Internal
Policies, Policy Department Economic and Scientific Policy, Frankfurt.
Feenstra, Robert, and Gordon Hanson. 1996. “Foreign Investment, Outsourcing and Relative Wages.” In The Political
Economy of Trade Policy: Paper in Honour of Jagdish Bhagwati,
edited by Robert Feenstra, Gene Grossman, and Douglas
Irwin, 89–127. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
———. 2001. “Global Production Sharing and Rising
Inequality: A Survey of Trade and Wages.” NBER Working Paper 8372, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Fernald, John G. 2014. “Productivity and Potential Output
before, during, and after the Great Recession.” NBER Working Paper 20248, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Gal, Peter, and Alexander Hijzen. 2016. “The Short-Term
Impact of Product Market Reforms: A Cross-Country
Firm-Level Analysis.” IMF Working Paper 16/116, International Monetary Fund, Washington DC.
Gali, Jordi. 2011. “The Return of the Wage Phillips Curve.”
Journal of the European Economic Association 9 (3): 436–61.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

Golden, Lonnie. 2016. “Still Falling Short on Hours and
Pay.” Economic Policy Institute, Washington, DC.
http://​www​.epi​.org/​​publication/​​still​​-falling​​-short​​-on​​-hours​​
-and​​-pay​​-part​​-time​​-work​​-becoming​​-new​​-normal/​​.
Goos, Maarten, Alan Manning, and Anna Salomons. 2014.
“Explaining Job Polarization: Routine-Biased Technological
Change and Offshoring.” American Economic Review 104
(8): 2509–26.
Gordon, Robert. 2013. “The Phillips Curve Is Alive and Well:
Inflation and the NAIRU during the Slow Recovery.” NBER
Working Paper 19390, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Haldane, Andrew G. 2017. “Work, Wages, and Monetary Policy.”
Speech given at the National Science and Media Museum,
Bradford, United Kingdom, June 20. http://​www​​.bankofengland​​
.co​​.uk/​​publications/​​Pages/​​speeches/​​2017/​​984​​.aspx.
Hall, Robert E. 2005. “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium
Wage Stickiness.” American Economic Review 95 (1): 50–65.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2016. Japan Article IV
Consultation Report. IMF Staff Country Report 16/267,
Washington, DC.
Izquierdo, Mario, Juan Francisco Jimeno, Theodora Kosma, Ana
Lamo, Stephen Millard, Tairi Rõõm, and Eliana Viviano.
2017. “Labour Market Adjustment in Europe During the
Crisis: Microeconomic Evidence From the Wage Dynamics
Network Survey”. European Central Bank Occasional Paper
Series 192. European Central Bank, Frankfurt.
Kang, Joong Shik, and Jay C. Shambaugh. 2014. “Progress
towards External Adjustment in the Euro Area Periphery
and the Baltics.” IMF Working Paper 14/131, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman. 2014. “The Global
Decline of the Labor Share.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
129 (1): 61–103.
Katz, Lawrence, and David Autor. 1999. “Changes in the Wage
Structure and Earnings Inequality.” In Handbook of Labor
Economics (3), edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Katz, Lawrence, and Alan Krueger. 2016. “The Rise and
Nature of Alternative Work Arrangements in the United
States, 1995–2015.” NBER Working Paper 22667, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Katz, Lawrence, and Kevin Murphy. 1992. “Changes in Relative
Wages, 1963–87: Supply and Demand Factors.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 107 (1): 35–78.
Kiley, Michael. 2014. “An Evaluation of the Inflationary
Pressure Associated with Short- and Long-term Unemployment.” FEDS Notes 2014–28, Federal Reserve Board,
Washington, DC.
Koeniger, Winfried, Marco Leonardi, and Luca Nunziata. 2007.
“Labor Market Institutions and Wage Inequality.” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review 60 (3): 340–56.
Kramarz, Francis. 2017. “Offshoring, Wages, and Employment:
Evidence from Data Matching Imports, Firms, and Workers.”

In The Factory Free Economy, edited by Lionel Fontagne and
Ann Harrison. https://​www​​.researchgate​​.net/​​publication/​​
303374155​​_The​​_Factory​​_Free​​_Economy.
Krueger, Alan. 2015. “How Tight Is the Labor Market?” Martin
Feldstein Lecture, National Bureau of Economic Research.
———, Judd Cramer, and David Cho. 2014. “Are the
Long-Term Unemployed on the Margins of the Labor
Market?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Brookings
Institution, Washington, DC.
Kumar, Anil, and Pia Orrenius. 2016. “A Closer Look at the
Phillips Curve Using State-Level Data.” Journal of Macroeconomics 47: 84–102.
Leamer, Edward. 1992. “Wage Effects of a US-Mexican Free
Trade Agreement.” NBER Working Paper 3991, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Washington, DC.
———. 1996. “Wage Inequality from International Competition and Technological Change: Theory and Country
Experience.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings
86 (2): 309–14.
Manning, Alan. 1993. “Wage Bargaining and the Phillips Curve:
The Identification and Specification of Aggregate Wage Equations.” CEP Discussion Paper dp0062, Centre for Economic
Performance, London School of Economic, London.
Mortensen, Dale T., and Christopher A. Pissarides. 1999. “Job
Reallocation, Employment Fluctuations and Unemployment.”
Handbook of Macroeconomics 1, 1171–228. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). 2017. “Economic Policy Reforms 2017: Going for
Growth.” Paris.
Parteka, Aleksandra. 2010. “Skilled-Unskilled Wage Gap in
the Enlarged EU: Sectoral Analysis Based on the Experience of EU-15 Countries and Five New Member States.”
12th European Trade Study group conference, Lausanne,
Switzerland.
Rudebusch, Glenn, and John Williams. 2014. “A Wedge in the
Dual Mandate: Mon­etary Policy and Long-Term Unemployment.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working
Paper 2014–14.
Smith, Christopher L. 2014. “The Effect of Labor Slack on
Wages: Evidence from State-Level Relationships.” FEDS
Notes, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC.
Stock, James H. 2011. “Discussion of Ball and Mazumder,
‘Inflation Dynamics and the Great Recession.’” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 42 (1): 387–402.
Taylor, John. 2016. “The Staying Power of Staggered Wage and
Price Setting Models in Macroeconomics.” NBER Working Paper 22356, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Trigari, Antonella. 2014. “Commentary: Long-Term Nonemployment and Job Displacement.” Paper prepared for
“Re-Evaluating Labor Market Dynamics,” August 21–23,
Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
Valletta, Robert G. 2016. “Recent Flattening in the Higher
Education Wage Premium: Polarization, Skill Downgrading,

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

115

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

or Both?” NBER Working Paper 22935, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Watson, Mark W. 2014. “Inflation Persistence, the NAIRU, and
the Great Recession,” American Economic Review: Papers and
Proceedings 104 (5): 31–36.
Wood, Adrian. 1991. “How Much Does Trade with the South
Affect Workers in the North?” World Bank Research Observer
6: 19–36, Washington, DC.
———. 1994. North-South Trade, Employment and Inequality: Changing Fortunes in a Skill-Driven World. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.

116

———.1995. “How Trade Hurt Unskilled Workers.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 9 (3): 57–80.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey. 2009. “On Estimating Firm-Level Production Functions Using Proxy Variables to Control for Unobservables.” Economic Letters 104 (3): 112–14.
Yellen, Janet L. 2005. “Productivity and Inflation.” Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter.
———. 2014. “Labor Market Dynamics and Monetary
Policy.” Speech at Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. https://​​www​​
.federalreserve​​.gov/​​newsevents/​​speech/​​yellen20140822a​​.htm.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER

3

THE EFFECTS OF WEATHER SHOCKS ON ECONOMIC ACTIVITY:
HOW CAN LOW-INCOME COUNTRIES COPE?

Global temperatures have increased at an unprecedented
pace over the past 40 years, and significant further
warming could occur, depending on our ability to restrain
greenhouse gas emissions. This chapter finds that increases
in temperature have uneven macroeconomic effects, with
adverse consequences concentrated in countries with
relatively hot climates, such as most low-income countries. In these countries, a rise in temperature lowers per
capita output, in both the short and medium term, by
reducing agricultural output, suppressing the productivity of workers exposed to heat, slowing investment,
and damaging health. To some extent, sound domestic
policies and development, in general, alongside investment in specific adaptation strategies, could help reduce
the adverse consequences of weather shocks. But given the
constraints faced by low-income countries, the international community must play a key role in supporting
these countries’ efforts to cope with climate change—a
global threat to which they have contributed little. And
while the analysis of the chapter focuses on the impact
of weather shocks in low-income countries, most countries will increasingly feel direct negative effects from
unmitigated climate change through warming above
optimal levels in currently cooler countries, more frequent
natural disasters, rising sea levels, loss of biodiversity,
and adverse spillovers from vulnerable countries. Looking
ahead, only continued international cooperation and a
concerted effort to stem the man-made causes of global
warming can limit the long-term risks of climate change.

Introduction
Since the turn of the 20th century, the Earth’s
average surface temperature has increased significantly.
Sizable swings in global temperatures used to happen
The main authors of this chapter are Sebastian Acevedo, Mico
Mrkaic, Natalija Novta, Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro, Evgenia
Pugacheva, and Petia Topalova (lead), with contributions from
Manoj Atolia, Claudio Baccianti, and Ricardo Marto and support
from Gavin Asdorian, Marina Klasnja, Olivia Ma, Fien Analbers
Ribeiro, Jilun Xing, and Yuan Zeng. The chapter benefited from
comments and suggestions by Edward Miguel, Benjamin Olken, and
Stéphane Hallegatte.

over long periods, such as fluctuations in and out of
the Ice Ages. However, the speed at which the climate
has changed over the past 30–40 years appears to be
unprecedented in the past 20,000 years (Figure 3.1).1
Most scientists agree that global temperatures are set to
rise further, at a scale and pace very much dependent
on our ability to restrain greenhouse gas emissions,
the central cause of global warming (IPCC 2013).
Extreme weather events, such as heat waves, droughts,
and floods, are likely to become more frequent, and
sea levels will rise. Although considerable uncertainty
surrounds temperature projections, the scientific
consensus predicts that without further action to tackle
climate change, average temperatures could rise by 4°C
or more by the end of the 21st century. Very substantial cuts to current emissions will be needed to limit
warming to less than 2°C. Will climate change have
significant macroeconomic consequences, especially in
low-income developing countries that tend to be more
exposed to the vagaries of the weather? And how can
these countries cope with the rises in temperature they
are set to experience over the coming decades?
Pinning down the economic consequences of climate change is difficult. Temperature increases of the
magnitude that could potentially occur over the next
century—and many other aspects of climate change,
such as rapid rise in sea levels, ocean acidification, and
the like—sit well outside recent (and relevant) historical experience and could affect a large number of
countries. Extrapolating from the historically observed
relationship between activity and weather patterns
could also be problematic as populations adapt to persistent changes in climate. Yet studying the macroeconomic effects of annual variation in weather patterns
1Climate refers to a distribution of weather outcomes for a
given location, while weather refers to a realization from that
distribution. Climate change typically implies that the whole
distribution of outcomes shifts, with a possible increase in the
likelihood of extreme outcomes. As argued by Weitzman (2011),
the fattening of the tails—the increase in the probability of potentially irreversible and catastrophic damages—justifies aggressive
policy actions to stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations in the
atmosphere (“climate change mitigation”) and adjust to the changing climate (“adaptation”).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

117

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 3.1. Average Global Temperature
(Degrees Celsius)

The average global temperature has risen at an extraordinary pace over the past
century, and signiﬁcant further warming could occur.
20 1. From 20,000 BCE to Present
19

Early farming
begins
Most mammoths
go extinct

18
17
16

The Great
Pyramid
completed

Last glacial
period ends

15
–20,000

–16,000

–12,000

Industrial
revolution
begins, ca.
1760

–8,000

1920

–4,000

0

2014

7 2. Recent and 21st Century Projections
(Deviations from 1880–1910 average)
6
Observed
5
RCP 8.5 mean prediction
4
RCP 4.5 mean prediction
3
2
1
0
–1
1880 1900

20

40

60

80

2000

20

40

60

80

2100

Sources: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project Phase Five AR5 Atlas subset; Marcott and others (2013);
Matsuura and Willmott (2007); National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA) Goddard Institute for Space Studies; Royal Netherlands Meteorological
Institute Climate Change Atlas; Shakun and others (2012); and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: In panel 2, the thin lines represent each of the 40 models in the IPCC WG1
AR5 Annex I Atlas, where a model with different parametrization is treated as a
separate model. The thick lines represent the multimodel mean. Representative
Concentration Pathways (RCP) are scenarios of greenhouse gas concentrations,
constructed by the IPCC. RCP 4.5 is an intermediate scenario, which assumes
increased attention to the environment, with emissions peaking around 2050 and
declining thereafter. RCP 8.5 is an unmitigated scenario in which emissions
continue to rise throughout the 21st century.

could produce useful insights.2 In an influential
study, Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012) find that higher
temperatures significantly reduce economic growth
in low-income countries. Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel
(2015a) provide evidence that productivity peaks at
about 13°C and declines strongly at higher tempera2Dell, Jones, and Olken (2014); Carleton and Hsiang (2016); and
Heal and Park (2016) provide surveys of the new climate literature,
which explores the impact of weather fluctuations on a broad range
of economic variables.

118

tures. Since low-income countries are concentrated
in geographic areas with hotter climates, the Burke,
Hsiang, and Miguel (2015a) findings suggest that a
rise in temperature would be particularly harmful for
this set of economies.
Countries negatively affected by climate change will
need to increase their resilience to rising temperatures
and extreme weather events, both by enhancing their
ability to smooth out shocks, which could become
more frequent, and by investing in adaptation strategies, such as activity diversification, infrastructure
investment, and technology innovation, that reduce the
harm they do. Populations may also respond to changing climatic conditions by relocating geographically,
which could have important cross-border ramifications.
But the evidence on which policies may help countries
and individuals cope with weather shocks is limited.
Understanding the macroeconomic effects of
weather shocks and the scope for policy actions to
moderate them will be crucial for low-income developing countries to achieve durable growth in the long
term—a precondition for convergence and implementation of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.
Drawing from and building on the existing literature, this chapter contributes to the policy debate by
examining the following questions:
•• What has been the historical relationship between
temperature and precipitation shocks and economic
activity in both the short and the medium term?
Are low-income countries particularly vulnerable?
Through what channels do weather fluctuations
affect the economy? And has the sensitivity of
growth to weather shocks changed over time?
•• How can countries, particularly low-income ones,
cope with weather shocks? Can policies and other
country characteristics mitigate the macroeconomic
response to weather fluctuations?
•• Given the projected path of temperature by the end
of the 21st century, what might be the impact of
climate change on low-income countries?
To address these questions, the chapter starts by
documenting the historical evolution and projected
change in temperature and precipitation patterns across
broad country groups according to leading climate
change models, as well as these groups’ contributions
to greenhouse gas emissions. It then examines the
historical evidence on the macroeconomic effects of
annual variation in temperature and precipitation

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

across a large sample of economies, highlighting the
channels through which climatic conditions affect the
macroeconomy. The chapter offers evidence on how
various policies and country characteristics influence
the sensitivity of growth to weather variations, using
both empirical analysis and model simulations, and
presents case studies of various climate change adaptation strategies. Finally, the chapter incorporates the
empirical estimates of economic loss from weather
shocks and projected changes in temperature into a
dynamic general equilibrium model to trace the potential long-term effects of climate change.
The chapter’s main findings are as follows:
•• The rise in temperature over the past century has
been broad based. No country has been spared from
the warming of the Earth’s surface, and no country is projected to be spared further temperature
increases, with the largest increases in temperature
expected in countries with relatively colder climates. The contribution of low-income developing
countries—which tend to be situated in some of the
hottest geographic areas on the planet—to atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations is negligible,
both in absolute terms and on a per capita basis.
•• The macroeconomic effect of temperature shocks
is uneven across countries. Confirming the global
nonlinear relationship between annual temperature and growth uncovered by Burke, Hsiang, and
Miguel (2015a) using an expanded data set, the
empirical analysis suggests that rising temperatures
lower per capita output in countries with relatively
high annual average temperature, such as most
low-income countries. In these economies, the
adverse effect is long-lasting and operates through
several channels: lower agricultural output, depressed
labor productivity in sectors more exposed to the
weather, reduced capital accumulation, and poorer
human health. Moreover, data indicate that macroeconomic outcomes have not become any less sensitive to temperature shocks in recent years, pointing
to significant adaptation constraints.
•• To some extent, sound policies and institutional
frameworks, investment in infrastructure, and other
adaptation strategies can reduce the damage from
temperature shocks in hot countries. Although
causal interpretation is difficult, empirical evidence
suggests that countries with better-regulated capital
markets, higher availability of infrastructure, flexible
exchange rates, and more democratic institutions
recover somewhat faster from the negative impacts

of temperature shocks. Higher temperatures also
constrain growth in hot regions of emerging market
and developing economies significantly more than in
hot regions of advanced economies, which corroborates the importance of development in reducing
vulnerability.
•• The temperature increase projected by 2100 under
a scenario of unmitigated climate change implies
significant economic losses for most low-income
countries. Under the conservative assumption that
weather shocks have permanent effects on the level,
rather than the growth rate, of per capita output,
model simulations suggest that the per capita GDP
of a representative low-income country would be
9 percent lower in 2100 than it would have been in
the absence of temperature increases, with the present value of output losses amounting to more than
100 percent of current GDP when discounted at the
growth-adjusted rate of 1.4 percent.
Taken together, these findings paint a worrisome
picture. Rising temperatures would have vastly unequal
effects across the world, with the brunt of adverse
consequences borne by those who can least afford it. In
all likelihood, most countries will increasingly feel the
direct impact of unmitigated climate change, through
warming above optimal temperatures, more frequent
(and more damaging) natural disasters, rising sea levels,
loss of biodiversity, and many other hard-to-quantify
effects. In addition, climate change is likely to create economic winners and losers at both individual
and sectoral levels, even in countries where the effect
might be moderate or positive on average. However,
low-income countries will suffer disproportionately
from further temperature increases—a global threat
to which they have contributed little. And within
low-income countries, the poor would likely be the
most heavily affected by climate change (Hallegatte
and Rozenberg 2017). Having little influence on the
future course of climate, how can these countries cope
with the challenges they face as temperatures rise?
The findings of this chapter suggest that domestic
policies can partially dampen the adverse effects of
weather shocks. Improving buffers and strengthening
well-targeted social safety nets that can deliver support when needed would help countries smooth some
of the instantaneous effects of weather shocks, while
policies and institutions that make capital and labor
markets more flexible and foster structural economic
transformation could help countries recover somewhat
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

119

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

faster and reduce their vulnerability to future shocks.
Adaptation strategies that reduce specific climate
change effects and risks, such as targeted infrastructure projects, adoption of appropriate technologies,
and mechanisms to transfer and share these risks
through financial markets, could also be part of the
toolkit for reducing the economic damage caused by
climate change.
But putting in place the right policies will be particularly difficult in low-income countries, which have
huge spending needs and limited ability to mobilize
the resources necessary for adaptation in a challenging economic environment. In some cases, political
uncertainty and security issues exacerbate the challenge. Moreover, even when in place, domestic policies
alone cannot fully insulate low-income countries from
the adverse consequences of climate change, as higher
temperatures push the biophysical limits of these countries’ ecosystems, potentially triggering more frequent
epidemics, famines, and other natural disasters, along
with armed conflict and refugee flows. The international spillovers from these difficult-to-predict effects
of climate change could be very considerable.
Climate change is a negative global externality of
potentially catastrophic proportions, and only collective action and multilateral cooperation can effectively address its causes and consequences. Mitigating
climate change requires radically transforming the
global energy system, including through the use of
fiscal instruments to better reflect environmental costs
in energy prices and promote cleaner technologies as
discussed in Box 3.6. Adapting to the consequences of
climate change necessitates vast investments, including
in boosting infrastructure, reinforcing coastal zones,
and strengthening water supply and flood protection (Margulis and Narain 2010; UNEP 2016). The
international community will have a key role to play
in fostering and coordinating financial and other
types of support for affected low-income countries.
With advanced and emerging market economies
contributing the lion’s share to the warming that has
occurred so far and is projected to continue, helping
low-income countries cope with its consequences is
a humanitarian imperative and sound global economic policy. In the future, only continued international cooperation and a concerted effort to stem the
man-made causes of global warming can limit the
long-term risks of climate change (IPCC 2014; IMF
2015; Stern 2015; Farid and others 2016; Hallegatte
and others 2016).
120

It is important to highlight from the outset the
inherent difficulty of quantifying the potential macroeconomic consequences of climate change. Extrapolating from historically observed weather responses
of GDP to the long-term effect of global warming is
challenging for several reasons.3 On one hand, such
an extrapolation may overstate the impact as governments and other economic agents take ameliorative
actions, make investments, or develop new technologies that help populations adapt to persistent changes
in climate. On the other hand, the actual impact could
be larger if there are nonlinearities in the response as
the climate shifts to conditions beyond recent experience.4 Moreover, the chapter does not separately
quantify the effects of natural disasters, whose higher
projected frequency may amplify the damages they
cause; it does not analyze distributional impacts across
sectors and households within countries, which may
be quite sizable; nor does it shed light on the consequences of many aspects of climate change, such as a
rapid rise in sea levels, ocean acidification, and the like,
that have no historical precedent but could have very
large macroeconomic consequences.5 Nevertheless, as
long as the Earth continues to warm over the rest of
the 21st century in the same pattern as over the past
50 years—a stochastic series of annual shocks along
an upward trend—this chapter may provide valuable
guidance on climate change vulnerabilities and adaptation needs under the current production technologies
and geographic distribution of populations (Dell,
Jones, and Olken 2012).

3Dell, Jones, and Olken (2014); Carleton and Hsiang (2016);
Hsiang (2016); and Lemoine (2017) provide discussions of the
conditions under which empirical estimates of the effect of weather
shocks based on historical data can shed light on the consequences
of climate change.
4For example, the historically observed natural year-to-year
temperature variability for countries located in the tropics is roughly
0.5°C. The projected increase in temperature for these countries
between 2005 and 2100 under the extreme unmitigated climate
change scenario is 4.1°C—in other words, more than 8.5 times
larger than the current natural variability, implying a totally new
climatic regime (see also World Bank 2013).
5A large body of literature studies the macroeconomic impact of
natural disasters (see, for example, Noy 2009; Cavallo and others
2013; Acevedo 2014; Felbermayr and Gröschl 2014; Cabezon and
others 2015; IMF 2016a; IMF 2016b; Gerling, forthcoming; and
Gerling, Moreno Badia, and Toffano, forthcoming). The chapter
focuses on direct measures of the weather because natural disaster
data may suffer from reporting and mismeasurement issues. Mismeasurement could be a particular problem in low-income countries,
which typically have lower capacity to accurately evaluate, record,
and report damage (Jennings 2011).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Temperature and Precipitation: Historical
Patterns and Projections
This section sets the context for the rest of the
chapter by summarizing the scientific consensus on
how climate and one of its key man-made drivers—
greenhouse gas emissions—have evolved over the past
century. The section then presents scientists’ projected
changes for the rest of the 21st century and discusses
the link between temperature, precipitation, and
weather-related disasters.

Figure 3.2. Increase in Average Global Temperature and
Contributions of Key Factors
(Deviations from 1880–1910 average, degrees Celsius)

According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, most of the
increase in temperature since 1950 can be attributed to human factors.
Temperature

Human

Natural

1.2
1.0

Historical Patterns

0.8

Global temperatures have increased by roughly 1°C
compared with the 1880–1910 average (Figure 3.2).
The rise started in earnest in the 1970s, following a
large increase in carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions.6
Although natural factors explain some of the warming
over the past century, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), more than
half of the temperature increase since 1950 can be
attributed to human activity (IPCC 2014).
The increase in temperature has occurred in all
regions, with the same accelerating trend, starting in
the 1970s (Figure 3.3).7 The median temperature over
the first 15 years of this century, compared with the
first 15 years of the past century, was 1.4°C higher in
advanced economies, 1.3°C higher in emerging market
economies, and 0.7°C higher in low-income developing countries. Even though most of the warming
occurred in advanced economies, by 2015 the temperature in the median low-income developing country
(25°C) was more than twice that of the median
advanced economy (11°C).
Other aspects of the climate have also changed
appreciably. Since 1900, the global mean sea level has
risen by 17–21 centimeters. As with temperature, there
has been an increase in the pace at which the sea level
is rising: from 0.17 centimeter a year throughout most
of the 20th century to 0.32 centimeter a year over the
past 20 years (IPCC 2014).

0.6

6The three most important greenhouse gases, which are regulated
under the Kyoto Protocol, are carbon dioxide (CO2), methane
(CH4), and nitrous oxide (N2O). Among those, CO2 has so far been
the largest contributor to global warming.
7Trends in precipitation are generally less clear (Figure 3.3, panels
2, 4, and 6). Precipitation has increased somewhat in the northern
hemisphere since the 1950s, and average precipitation in low-income
developing countries has declined since the 1970s.

GHG

0.4
0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
1880

1900

20

40

60

80

2000

16

Sources: Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center; National Aeronautics and
Space Administration (NASA) Goddard Institute for Space Studies; Roston and
Migliozzi (2015); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The lines present the actual increase in land and ocean surface air
temperature relative to 1880–1910 and the increase predicted by different
factors. Human factors include land use, ozone emissions, aerosol emissions, and
GHG emissions. Natural factors include orbital changes, solar output, and volcanic
activity. The contribution of each factor is estimated by “ModelE2” by NASA
Goddard Institute for Space Studies. GHG = greenhouse gases.

CO2 emissions have grown rapidly since the 1950s
across all income groups, along with rising incomes
and populations (Figure 3.4). However, emissions in
low-income developing countries are still a fraction of
those in advanced and emerging market economies,
in both aggregate and per capita terms. And although
advanced economies have managed to contain their
overall emissions over the past decade, in per capita
terms they still contribute vastly more than the rest of
the world.

Projections
The overwhelming majority of scientists agree that
future climate change depends largely on the path
of CO2 emissions, which in turn hinges on demoInternational Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

121

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 3.4. Annual CO 2 Emissions across Broad Country
Groups

Figure 3.3. Temperature and Precipitation across Broad
Country Groups

(Billion metric tons, unless noted otherwise)

Temperature has risen across all country groups, while precipitation does not
exhibit a clear pattern.

CO2 emissions have grown rapidly since the 1950s across all income groups, but
emissions by low-income developing countries are negligible in both absolute and
per capita terms.

Advanced Economies
12

1. Temperature
(Degrees Celsius)

2. Precipitation
(mm per year)

11

1,200

25

1,100

20

1,000
900

10

15

1. Advanced Economies

2. Emerging Market
Economies

20

China
India
Russia
Other EMs

United States
Germany
Japan
Other AEs

25

15

10

10

5

5

800
9
8
1900 20

700
40

60

80 2000 15 1900 20 40 60

80 2000 15

600

1.0

Emerging Market Economies
24 3. Temperature
(Degrees Celsius)

4. Precipitation
(mm per year)

23

1,200

0.6

1,000

0.4

900
800

21

700
40

80 2000 15 1900 20 40 60

60

80 2000 15

600

Low-Income Developing Countries
26 5. Temperature
(Degrees Celsius)

6. Precipitation
(mm per year)

25

1,600
1,500
1,400
1,300

24

1,200
1,100

23
1900 20

40

60

80 2000 15 1900 20 40 60

1,000
80 2000 15

Sources: Climate Research Unit (v. 3.24); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Terrestrial median annual temperature and precipitation data at grid level are
aggregated to the country-year level using 1950 population weights. See Annex 3.1
for data sources and country groupings. mm = millimeter.

122

0.8

1,100

22

20
1900 20

0
1880 1990 20 40

60 80 2000 1880 1990 20 40

3. Low-Income Developing
Countries
Vietnam
Nigeria
Bangladesh
Other LIDCs

0.2
0.0
1880 1990 20 40

60 80 2000

60 80 2000

4. Average CO 2 Emissions
per Capita, 1970–2014
(Metric tons)
United States
Russia
Germany
Japan
Other AEs
Other EMs
China
India
Vietnam
Nigeria
Other LIDCs
Bangladesh
0
5
10 15

0

20

Sources: Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs= advanced economies; CO 2 = carbon dioxide; EMs = emerging markets;
LIDCs = low-income developing countries.

graphic changes, economic development, technological
advances, and the vigor with which countries implement mitigation measures.8 Yet, given the significant
buildup and persistence of greenhouse gas concentration in the atmosphere, even with immediate and
substantial cuts to current greenhouse gas emissions,
temperatures are projected to rise for some time,
albeit at a slower pace. The IPCC constructed four
possible scenarios, called Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP), using alternative greenhouse
gas concentration assumptions to project likely ranges
8Surveying 12,000 peer-reviewed scientific papers on climate
change, Cook and others (2013) find that 97 percent of the studies
expressing a position on the reasons behind global warming agree
that it is influenced by man-made causes. See also Cook and
others (2016).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

of temperatures over the 21st century. The rest of the
chapter focuses on two of these scenarios: an intermediate path (RCP 4.5) and an unmitigated path (RCP
8.5), as shown in Figure 3.1, panel 2.9
Under the RCP 8.5 scenario of unmitigated climate
change, the average global temperature by 2081–2100
could rise by 3.7°C (with a projected range of
2.6°C–4.8°C).10 Warming would occur all over the
globe, with larger increases over the northern hemisphere, where some regions could experience temperatures almost 12°C higher than in 2005 (Figure 3.5).
Between 2005 and 2100, the increase for the median
advanced economy is projected to be 4.4°C, and 4.5°C
for the median emerging market economy and median
low-income developing country. Increases are projected
to be smaller in absolute terms closer to the equator,
but are very significant when set against the historical
year-to-year and intrayear variability in temperature
observed in those locations. Change in precipitation
will vary by region, with dry areas generally expected
to become drier and wet regions expected to experience
an increase in rainfall.
Under this scenario, the global mean sea level is
projected to rise by almost 0.8 meter by the end
of the 21st century, exposing coastal areas, including some large population centers, to higher risk
of flooding and erosion. Sea level rise will not be
uniform across regions—it is projected to be higher
than the global mean closer to the equator and less
than the global mean at high latitudes (IPCC 2014;
World Bank 2013).
It is important once again to stress the large uncertainty surrounding climate change projections. Future
emissions depend on many factors that are difficult
to predict and, even for the same emission scenario,
climate models differ widely in their temperature and
precipitation projections (Figure 3.1, panel 2). However, it is precisely this uncertainty and the possibility
9The Paris Agreement aims to contain the rise in temperature to
less than 2°C (ideally to less than 1.5°C) relative to the preindustrial
average, which would require policy efforts beyond those assumed
under the RCP 4.5 scenario. Under the RCP 4.5 scenario, there is
increased attention to the environment. CO2 emissions peak around
2050 and decline thereafter, with a resulting temperature increase of
1.8°C by 2081–2100 relative to 1986–2005 (a likely range of 1.1°C
to 2.6°C and a greater than 50 percent chance of an increase exceeding 2°C by 2100). Under the RCP 8.5 scenario, CO2 emissions grow
throughout the 21st century.
10Under this scenario, the average increase in population-weighted
temperature between 2005 and 2100 across the countries in the sample is projected to be 4.4°C, with the median country experiencing
warming of 4.5°C.

of fat tails—the probability that catastrophic climate
change can occur—that is behind calls for strong mitigation actions to reduce emissions and for adaptation
to prepare for significant shocks (Weitzman 2011).

Weather-Related Disasters
As temperatures rise, the risks of extreme weather
events, such as floods, droughts, and heat waves, will
increase (IPCC 2014). New statistical analysis suggests
that projected climate change will likely bring more
frequent weather-related disasters—events that cause
great damage or loss of life.11 This likelihood is particularly important for low-income developing countries
and small states, which historically have been much
more likely, relative to their land area, to experience
natural disasters than advanced and emerging market
economies (Figure 3.6, panel 1).12
Using monthly data from 1990 to 2014 on 8,000
weather-related disasters, a statistical analysis uncovers
the historical relationship between the occurrence of a
disaster and temperature and precipitation.13 It then
combines the estimated elasticities and the projected
monthly temperature and precipitation in 2050 and
2100 under the RCP 8.5 scenario to forecast the
likelihood of natural disasters. The results indicate
that most disaster types will be more common by the
end of the century, across all country income levels.
As depicted in Figure 3.6, the frequency of disasters
caused by heat waves or tropical cyclones will increase
considerably (see Box 3.1, which explores the effect
of tropical cyclones on economic activity).14 Similarly,
11The International Disaster Database (EM-DAT) defines a natural disaster as an event in which at least one of the following criteria
is met: 10 or more people are reported killed, 100 or more people
are reported affected, and either a declaration of a state of emergency
or a call for international assistance is made (Guha-Sapir, Below, and
Hoyois 2015).
12Low-income developing countries and small states, respectively,
are five and 200 times more likely to be hit by a weather-related
natural disaster than the rest of the world, after controlling for
country size.
13The probability of each disaster type (flood, tropical cyclone,
and so on) is estimated using a panel logit with country fixed effects,
in which temperature and precipitation are the main explanatory
variables. The analysis expands on Thomas and Lopez (2015) by
modeling each disaster type separately and relying on monthly rather
than annual data. See Annex 3.2 for further details.
14Scientists project that the frequency of tropical cyclone storms
will decrease, but their strength and intensity will rise in a warmer
world (Knutson and others 2010). This could lead to more natural
disasters caused by more intense tropical cyclones despite the overall
lower frequency of storms.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

123

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 3.5. Temperature and Precipitation Projections under the RCP 8.5 Scenario
Under the scenario of continued increase in greenhouse gas emissions, temperatures across the globe are projected to rise signiﬁcantly.
1. Temperature Change between 2005 and 2100
(Degrees Celsius)

12
10
8
6
4
2

2. Precipitation Change between 2005 and 2100
(mm per year)

1,500 +
1,000
500
0
–500
–1,000

Sources: National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled Projections (NEX-GDDP); World Bank Group Cartography
Unit; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The NEX-GDDP data set comprises downscaled climate scenarios for the globe that are derived from the General Circulation Model (GCM) runs conducted under
the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) and for two Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP) greenhouse gas emissions scenarios (4.5 and
8.5). The CMIP5 GCM runs were developed for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth Assessment Report. The data set includes downscaled projections
from the 21 models and scenarios for daily maximum temperature, minimum temperature, and precipitation for 1950–2100. The spatial resolution of the data set is
0.25 degrees (~25 km x 25 km). mm = millimeter.

124

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Figure 3.6. Natural Disasters: Historical and Projected
Monthly Probability of Occurrence
Natural disasters, which have historically occurred with greater frequency in lowincome developing countries relative to their land area, could become more
common by the end of the 21st century under the scenario of continued increase in
greenhouse gas emissions.
2010–14

Other

LIDCs
Drought LIDCs

2100
2. Tropical Cyclone

1. Natural Disasters by Type,
1990–2014
LIDCs

2050

0.07
0.06

Flood

0.05
0.04

8,476
disasters,
in LIDCs
2,606
LIDCs

Tropical cyclone

LIDCs

0.03
0.02
0.01

Epidemic
AEs

EMs

LIDCs

4. Heat Wave

0.10 3. Flood

0.00

0.20

0.08

0.16

0.06

0.12

0.04

0.08

0.02

0.04

0.00

AEs

EMs

LIDCs

0.14 5. Epidemic

AEs

EMs

LIDCs

6. Wildﬁre

0.00

1.0

0.12

0.8

0.10
0.08

0.6

0.06

0.4

0.04
0.2

0.02
0.00

AEs

EMs

LIDCs

floods and epidemics, which mainly affect low-income
developing countries, will also become more common.
More frequent weather-related disasters, without a
corresponding increase in reconstruction capabilities,
could amplify the damages they cause because economies may have insufficient time to recover between
events (Hallegatte, Hourcade, and Dumas 2007).

AEs

EMs

LIDCs

0.0

Sources: International Disaster Database (EM-DAT); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 1, the colors indicate the different types of natural disasters, with the
lighter shades of each color specifying the portion that has occurred in low-income
developing countries (LIDCs). Panels 2–6 show the predicted monthly probability of
a disaster in 2050 and 2100, based on the Representative Concentration Pathways
8.5 scenario. Most of the predicted probabilities for individual months are not
statistically signiﬁcant, therefore the results should only be interpreted as
indicative of the potential increase in the frequency of disasters with climate
change. AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging markets; LIDCs =
low-income developing countries.

The Macroeconomic Impact of Weather Shocks
The design of appropriate policies to cope with
climate change requires an understanding of its potential macroeconomic consequences. In the absence of
historical experience with climate change that may be
relevant for countries today, the analysis in this section
builds on existing literature and identifies how annual
fluctuations in temperature and precipitation affect
macroeconomic performance in the short and medium
term. The channels through which macroeconomic
effects occur and the changes in the sensitivity of
growth to weather shocks are explored, motivated by
evidence that higher temperatures constrain per capita
GDP growth in countries with hot climates.

Short- and Medium-Term Effects
To measure the impact of weather shocks, this
section examines the historical relationship between
weather patterns and economic activity, using the
approach of Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012) and
Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015a). Similar to
these studies, the analysis uses within-country and
across-country year-to-year fluctuations in temperature and precipitation to identify the causal effect of
weather on aggregate outcomes, both contemporaneously and over the medium term. It builds on these
studies by expanding the geographic and temporal
coverage of the analysis, examining the effects of
weather shocks on a larger set of outcome variables
and establishing the robustness of findings to different sources of weather data and alternative, more
flexible empirical specifications.
The baseline analysis uses Jordà’s (2005) local projection method to trace the impulse response function
of real per capita GDP to a weather shock in a sample
of more than 180 economies during 1950–2015.
Weather is measured as the country’s average annual
temperature and precipitation, along with the squared
terms of temperature and precipitation to account for
the global nonlinear relationship between temperature
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

125

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 3.7. Effect of Temperature Increase on Real per
Capita Output
(Percent)

In relatively hot countries, such as most low-income developing countries, an
increase in temperature has a negative, statistically signiﬁcant, and long-lasting
effect on per capita output.
Estimate
90 percent conﬁdence interval
Median temperature
Percent of countries (right scale)

Effect over Time
(Years on x-axis)

Contemporaneous Effect
(Temperature on x-axis)
1. Advanced Economies

2
1
0
–1
–2
–3

0

6 10 14 18 22 26 30
3. Emerging Market
Economies

2
1
0
–1
–2
–3

0

6 10 14 18 22 26 30

18
16
14
11
9
7
5
2
0
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

5. Low-Income
18
Developing Countries 15

2
1

2. Advanced Economies
(T = 11°C)

2
1
0
–1
–2

–1 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

4. Emerging Market
Economies (T = 22°C)

–3
7
2
1
0
–1
–2

–1 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

6. Low-Income Developing
Countries (T = 25°C)

13

–3
7
2
1

0

10

0

–1

8

–1

5

–2
–3

–2

3
0

6 10 14 18 22 26 30

0

–1 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

–3
7

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Left-hand-side panels superimpose the contemporaneous effect of a 1°C
increase in temperature on per capita output at different temperature levels
computed as per equation (3.3) over the distribution of average annual
temperatures recorded in 2015 in advanced economies (panel 1), emerging
markets (panel 3), and low-income developing countries (panel 5). The blue lines
show the point estimates and 90 percent conﬁdence intervals, while the light blue
bars denote the percent of countries at each temperature level. The vertical red
line is the median temperature for the country group. Right-hand-side panels
depict the impulse response of per capita output to a 1°C increase in temperature
estimated at the median temperature of advanced economies (panel 2), emerging
markets (panel 4), and low-income developing countries (panel 6). Horizon 0 is the
year of the shock. T = temperature.

126

and growth, as demonstrated by Burke, Hsiang, and
Miguel (2015a).15
The analysis confirms the existence of a statistically
significant nonlinear effect of temperature on per capita
economic growth, first established by Burke, Hsiang,
and Miguel (2015a), in this chapter’s substantially larger
sample. In countries with high average temperatures,
an increase in temperature dampens economic activity, whereas it has the opposite effect in much colder
climates. The threshold temperature is estimated to be
about 13°C to 15°C (see Annex Table 3.3.1).16 These
results suggest highly uneven effects of warming across
the globe (Figures 3.7 and 3.8).
Because most advanced economies are in colder
locations, with annual average temperatures close to
the threshold, a marginal temperature increase does
not materially affect their contemporaneous growth
(Figure 3.7, panel 1).17 Emerging market economies
and particularly low-income developing countries tend
15Average annual temperature and precipitation are constructed
by aggregating weather data at the grid-cell level to the level of the
country using the population in each cell as weights to account
for differences in population density within countries and capture
the average weather experienced by a person in the country (see
Annexes 3.1 and 3.3). The empirical approach consists of regressing
contemporaneous and future output growth on temperature and
precipitation and the squared terms to estimate an impulse response
function at various horizons, controlling for country fixed effects,
region-year fixed effects, lags and forwards of weather shocks, and
lagged growth. See Annex 3.3 for further details.
16The finding is robust to, among other things: (1) using alternative sources of raw grid-level weather data, (2) aggregating grid-level
weather data to country averages with population weights from
different decades, (3) estimation through an autoregressive distributive lag specification instead of a local projection method, (4) using
country-specific linear and quadratic time trends as opposed to
region-year fixed effects, and (5) controlling for the occurrence of
natural disasters. The analysis does not find a consistently significant
relationship between precipitation and per capita GDP growth,
although it uncovers an effect of precipitation on agricultural output
(Annex Tables 3.3.1 and 3.3.2).
17Even if the effects on overall GDP in these countries are negligible, this may mask large losses and gains, with some sectors facing
large investment needs to cope with higher temperatures, rising sea
levels, or more damaging disasters. Moreover, the analysis focuses on
the macroeconomic effects of a limited set of weather characteristics,
namely temperature and precipitation. The negative impact of other
aspects of the climate, such as the rise in sea levels or the occurrence
of extreme weather events, may be less unequal across broad income
groups, as demonstrated in Box 3.1, which documents similar output losses from tropical cyclones across advanced and emerging market economies. The estimates also abstract from potential spillovers
to advanced economies from famines, epidemics, social conflicts,
and other difficult-to-predict effects of weather shocks in vulnerable economies. Moreover, under the scenario of unconstrained
CO2 emissions, most advanced economies will cross the threshold
temperature and would start suffering the negative effects of higher
temperatures on economic output (Annex Figure 3.6.1).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Figure 3.8. Effect of Temperature Increase on Real per Capita Output across the Globe
(Percent)

An increase in temperature has a highly uneven effect across the globe, with adverse consequences concentrated in the parts of the world where the majority of
the world’s population lives.
1. Effect of a 1°C Increase in Temperature on Real per Capita Output at the Grid Level

4.23
3.58
2.93
2.28
1.63
0.98
0.33
–0.32
–0.97
–1.62
–2.27

2. Effect of a 1°C Increase in Temperature on Real per Capita Output at the Country Level, with Countries Rescaled in Proportion to Their Population

0.80 to 1.63
0.43 to 0.80
0.33 to 0.43
–0.50 to –0.32
–0.97 to –0.50
–1.30 to –0.97
–1.68 to –1.30
Insigniﬁcant effect
No data

Sources: Natural Earth; ScapeToad; United Nations World Population Prospects Database: the 2015 Revision; World Bank Group Cartography Unit;
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The maps depict the contemporaneous effect of a 1°C increase in temperature on per capita output computed as per equation (3.3). Panel 1 uses 2005 gridlevel temperature, while panel 2 uses the recent 10-year average country-level temperature together with estimated coefﬁcients in Annex Table 3.3.1, column (5). In
the cartogram in panel 2, each country is rescaled in proportion to its 2015 population. Gray areas indicate the estimated impact is not statistically signiﬁcant.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

127

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

to have much hotter climates, and a rise in temperature significantly lowers per capita GDP growth. For
the median emerging market economy, a 1°C increase
from a temperature of 22°C lowers growth in the
same year by 0.9 percentage point. For the median
low-income developing country, with a temperature
of 25°C, the effect of a 1°C increase in temperature is
even larger: growth falls by 1.2 percentage points (Figure 3.7, panels 3 and 5).18 And even though countries
projected to be significantly affected by an increase in
temperature produced only about one-fifth of global
GDP in 2016, they are home to close to 60 percent of
current global population and more than 75 percent
of the projected global population at the end of the
century (Figure 3.8 and Annex Figure 3.3.1).
Does economic activity in countries with warmer
climates recover quickly after a rise in temperature? The
analysis suggests not. Even seven years after a weather
shock, per capita output is 1 percent lower for the median
emerging market economy and 1.5 percent lower for the
median low-income country (Figure 3.7, panels 2, 4, and
6).19 A deepening in the shape of the estimated impulse
response of output to a temperature shock hints at the
possibility of a growth effect (and consequently much
larger economic losses from higher temperatures). However, statistically, it is not possible to reject the hypothesis
that the contemporaneous and medium-term effects of a
temperature shock on per capita output are identical.20

Channels of Impact
The weather can influence economic activity through
various channels. The most obvious one is agricultural
output, given that temperature and precipitation are
direct inputs in crop production. However, studies show
evidence of broader impacts, including on labor productivity, mortality, health, and conflict.21 The literature
18There

are also substantial differences in the estimated effects
of temperature increases within each broad country group, which
reflect the wide distribution of average temperature across countries
(Figure 3.7, panels 1, 3, and 5; Figure 3.8).
19The persistence of the estimated effects may reflect the relatively
persistent nature of temperature shocks. Univariate time series regression
analysis shows that temperature shocks decay slowly, especially in relatively hot locations. A 1°C degree increase in annual temperature leads
to significantly higher temperatures over the subsequent eight years.
20Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012) and Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel
(2015a) argue in favor of a growth effect, although it is difficult
to pin down the precise channel through which weather shocks
persistently influence economic growth.
21See Dell, Jones, and Olken (2014); Carleton and Hsiang (2016);
and Heal and Park (2016) for literature reviews. Weather shocks
can also indirectly affect economic activity through their impacts

128

Figure 3.9. Effect of Temperature Increase on Sectoral Output
Estimated at the Temperature of the Median Low-Income
Developing Country
(Percent; years on x-axis)

An increase in temperature lowers agricultural output, but also has adverse effects
on manufacturing value added in hot countries.
Estimate

90 percent conﬁdence interval

2 1. Agriculture Value Added

2. Crop Production

2

1

1

0

0

–1

–1

–2

–2

–3

–3

–4

–4

–5

–5

–6
–1 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

2 3. Manufacturing Value
Added
1

–1 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

–6
7

4. Services Value Added

2
1

0

0

–1

–1

–2

–2

–3

–3

–4

–4

–5

–5

–6
–1 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

–1 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

–6
7

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The panels depict the effect of a 1°C increase in temperature estimated at
the median low-income developing country temperature (25°C). Horizon 0 is the
year of the shock. Crop production is an index, produced by the Food and
Agriculture Organization, of price-weighted quantities of agricultural commodities
produced excluding production for seeds and fodder.

so far has often studied these effects within a specific
country or through laboratory experiments; this chapter
examines whether these channels are also at work in a
cross-country setting. Box 3.1 extends the analysis in
this section by examining the macroeconomic effects of
another aspect of the weather—tropical cyclones.
The main analysis begins by studying whether
weather shocks influence only agricultural production or also affect other economic sectors. As shown
on third markets. See Cashin, Mohaddes, and Raissi (2017) for an
analysis of the international macroeconomic transmission of El Niño
within a dynamic multicountry framework.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

in Figure 3.9, at the temperatures prevailing in the
median low-income developing country, agricultural
value added and crop production drop with higher
temperatures, recover somewhat in subsequent years,
and generally remain depressed over the medium
term—much as expected and as documented in a large
body of work.22
However, the analysis also confirms findings that
industrial output is similarly hurt as temperatures rise
in countries with hot climates, although the estimates
are more imprecise (see also Dell, Jones, and Olken
2012; Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel 2015a). Only
services sector output appears to be sheltered from
the weather.
To shed light on the reasons weather shocks affect
sectors besides agriculture, the analysis concentrates
on how key elements of the aggregate production
function—productivity and labor and capital inputs—
respond to weather shocks. As in other studies, the
analysis aims to capture the net reduced-form effects of
weather on various outcomes rather than uncover the
potentially complex structural relationships that may
exist among these variables.

for sectors in which workers are directly exposed to
the weather.24
Analysis of sectoral data on value added per worker
reveals that, at the temperatures prevailing in the
median low-income developing country, productivity of workers in heat-exposed industries falls
significantly after a rise in temperature (Figure 3.10,
panels 1 and 2). However, labor productivity is
unaffected in industries in which work is performed
mostly indoors.
Overall productivity may also decline if weather
shocks provoke political instability, incite conflict,
or undermine governing institutions in other ways.
Although a more detailed analysis would be beyond
the scope of this chapter, numerous studies document a strong link between weather shocks and these
outcomes.25 Since conflict is one of the key triggers of
refugee flows, as discussed in Chapter 1 of the April
2017 World Economic Outlook (WEO), weather shocks
could result in substantial spillovers to neighboring
countries and ultimately to advanced economies
through this channel.

Productivity

Temperature increases are largely supply-side shocks,
but they could lead to persistent output losses and
affect growth if they influence the rate of factor accumulation.26 Using national accounts data, the analysis
examines the response of the main components of
aggregate demand—gross capital formation, consumption, exports, and imports—to weather shocks within
the empirical framework described above. At the tem-

Evidence from surveys and other sources shows
that exposure to heat above a certain point reduces
people’s performance on both cognitive and physical tasks.23 The analysis therefore examines whether
higher temperatures in parts of the world that are
hot decrease labor productivity. If productivity is a
channel through which weather shocks affect aggregate GDP, the effect should be significantly larger
22See, among others, Barrios, Bazoumana, and Strobl (2010);
Barrios, Bertinelli, and Strobl (2006); Feng, Krueger, and Oppenheimer (2010); Schlenker and Lobell (2010); Lobell, Schlenker, and
Costa-Roberts (2011); and Lanzafame (2014) for evidence from
emerging market and developing economies, and Schlenker and
Roberts (2009), Burke and Emerick (2016), and Wang and others
(2017) for evidence from the United States. Unlike per capita output, agricultural value added and crop production respond to precipitation, in addition to temperature shocks, with more precipitation
generally boosting production. See Annex Table 3.3.2.
23Seppänen, Fisk, and Faulkner (2003) report a productivity
loss of about 2 percent for every 1°C increase in temperature
above 25°C, based on a survey of laboratory experiments. See also
Seppänen, Fisk, and Lei (2006) for a meta-analysis of the literature, Deryugina and Hsiang (2014) for evidence from the United
States, and Somanathan and others (2017) for recent evidence on
labor productivity from India. Heat stress may also reduce cognitive
function, as captured in student performance (Wargocki and Wyon
2007; Graff Zivin, Hsiang, and Neidell 2015; Garg, Jagnani, and
Taraz 2017; Park 2017).

Capital Accumulation

24The analysis follows Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014) and uses the
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health definitions of
heat-exposed industries. Heat-exposed industries include agriculture,
forestry, fishing and hunting, construction, mining, transportation,
and utilities, as well as manufacturing in facilities that may not be
climate controlled in low-income countries and whose production
processes often generate considerable heat.
25Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015b) review the literature that
links climate to conflict. Forcible removal of rulers has also been
linked to fluctuations in climate (Burke and Leigh 2010; Dell, Jones,
and Olken 2012; Chaney 2013; Kim 2014), and several historical
cases of societal collapse have been compellingly attributed to climate
change (Cullen and others 2000; Haug and others 2003; Buckley
and others 2010; Büntgen and others 2011).
26Investment may fall in response to temperature shocks because
there are fewer resources to invest, because the rate of return on
capital is lower, and/or because the temporary negative shock to
income raises the cost of financing investment in an environment
of imperfect capital markets (see, for example, Fankhauser and Tol
2005). When access to formal savings, credit, or insurance is limited,
households may also sell productive assets to smooth consumption in
response to weather shocks.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

129

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 3.10. Effect of Temperature Increase on Productivity,
Capital, and Labor Input Estimated at the Temperature of the
Median Low-Income Developing Country

perature of the median low-income country, all four
components respond negatively to a 1°C increase in
temperature. However, in the medium term, the effect
is most pronounced for investment, which is estimated
to be 6 percent lower seven years after the shock
(Figure 3.10, panel 3). Imports, which are typically
closely tied to investment, also exhibit a significant and
long-lasting drop as temperature rises (Chapter 2 of
the October 2016 WEO).27

(Percent; years on x-axis)

In hot countries, an increase in temperature dampens labor productivity in heatexposed industries, depresses investment and imports, and has damaging health
effects.
Estimate

90 percent conﬁdence interval
2. Labor Productivity in
Non-Heat-Exposed
Industries

4 1. Labor Productivity in
Heat-Exposed Industries
2

4
2

0

0

–2

–2

–4

–4

–6
–1 0
2

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

–1 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

4. Imports

3. Investment

–6
7
2

0

0

–2

–2

–4

–4

–6

–6

–8

–8

–10

–10

–12
–1 0
1.5

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

–1 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

6. Human Development
Index

5. Infant Mortality

–12
7
0.5

1.0
0.0
0.5
–0.5

0.0
–0.5
–1 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

–1 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

–1.0
7

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The panels depict the effect of a 1°C increase in temperature estimated at
the median low-income developing country temperature (25°C). Horizon 0 is the
year of the shock. Heat-exposed industries include agriculture, forestry, ﬁshing, and
hunting, construction, mining, transportation, utilities, and manufacturing,
following Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014).

130

Labor Supply
The analysis also reveals that, in hot climates, higher
temperatures may reduce (future) labor supply because
of their influence on mortality rates (Figure 3.10,
panel 5). A 1°C increase in temperature raises infant
mortality by 0.12 percentage point in the year of the
shock. The effect grows through the estimation period
as weather-related lower income (and potential food
insecurity) reinforces the direct physiological impact of
higher temperatures in hot climates. This cross-country
panel evidence corroborates findings of numerous
studies of links between weather and mortality,
prenatal health, and other health outcomes in various
countries.28 The adverse effects on the health and
educational attainment of children could be one of the
key reasons behind the long-lasting nature of weather’s
consequences.

Effects over Time
As countries repeatedly face weather fluctuations,
it is reasonable to expect them to take measures
that lessen the impact of temperature shocks on the
economy. However, the analysis does not find any
obvious evidence of such adaptation over the past 60
years. Estimates of the response of per capita output
27The

negative effect of temperature shocks on aggregate investment is consistent with evidence from household-level studies,
which find that weather shocks could slow or even reverse capital
accumulation as households try to smooth consumption or perceive
investment as too risky (Hallegatte and others 2016).
28Deschênes (2012) and Guo and others (2014) provide comprehensive reviews of the literature on the link between temperature and
mortality and health. See, for example, Deschênes and Greenstone
(2011), Barreca (2012), and Barreca and others (2016) for evidence
from the United States; Kudamatsu, Persson, and Strömberg (2012)
for evidence from a subset of African countries; and Burgess and
others (2014) for evidence from India. Carleton (2017) documents
a significant increase in suicide rates when higher temperatures
threaten agricultural yields in India. Deryugina and Hsiang (2014),
Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014), Park (2016), and Somanathan and
others (2017) find a direct effect of higher temperature on labor
supply and productivity.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

to temperature shocks over rolling 20-year periods
suggest that the relationship between the two variables
has remained constant (Figure 3.11).29 The reasons
behind this apparent lack of adaptation are not well
understood, but high costs, limited access to credit for
financing adaptation, insufficient information about
the benefits of adaptation, limited rationality in planning for future risks, and inadequate access to technology are likely constraints, as discussed in Carleton and
Hsiang (2016).

Figure 3.11. Effect of Temperature Increase on Real per
Capita Output Estimated at the Temperature of the Median
Low-Income Developing Country over Time
(Percent; years on x-axis)

The contemporaneous effect of temperature shocks on per capita output has
remained relatively constant over time.
1.0
0.5

Estimate

90 percent conﬁdence interval

0.0

Coping with Weather Shocks and
Climate Change
This section examines how policies, institutions,
and other country characteristics can mitigate the
adverse consequences of temperature shocks and
climate change. It begins by discussing the toolkit
available to policymakers and private agents with
which to cope with weather shocks. It then presents
illustrative evidence of the extent to which, historically,
some policies (along with the overall level of development) have shaped the link between macroeconomic
performance and temperature shocks. The empirical
evidence is complemented in Box 3.2 by dynamic
general equilibrium model scenarios of the response
of macroeconomic aggregates to weather shocks under
various proxies for relevant policies. Case studies of
specific adaptation strategies occupy Boxes 3.3 and 3.4.
The section also examines migration as a response to
persistent changes in climate as adaptation strategies
reach their limits. Finally, the role of international
cooperation in supporting countries’ efforts to cope
with weather shocks and climate change is discussed.

A Toolkit
To structure the discussion, this subsection lays out
a toolkit of possible domestic policy actions and private choices that may help insulate economic activity
29Studies reveal large differences in the ability of individual
sectors to adapt to specific weather shocks. For example, Hsiang
and Narita (2012) and Hsiang and Jina (2014) find that countries
more frequently exposed to tropical cyclones experience less
damage, which suggests that they have learned to cope with these
extreme events. Mortality caused by high temperatures has declined
significantly over time with the introduction of air-conditioning
in the United States (Barreca and others 2016). But there is little
evidence of declining sensitivity of agricultural yields (Burke and
Emerick 2016) or overall output (Dell, Jones, and Olken 2012;
Deryugina and Hsiang 2014; Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel 2015a)
to temperature fluctuations.

–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
–2.0
–2.5
–3.0
1965

70

75

80

85

90

95

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure depicts the effect of a 1°C increase in temperature at horizon 0
estimated at the median low-income developing country temperature (25°C), over
a 20-year rolling window. Each point estimate is for a period (t, t + 20).

from weather shocks and from the risks that accompany climate change (Figure 3.12).
Fluctuations in weather can be viewed as one of
many shocks that affect macroeconomic performance.
As such, their consequences could be attenuated by
general macroeconomic and structural policies and
institutions that enhance countries’ ex ante and ex
post resilience to shocks. While priorities will vary
depending on each country’s specific circumstances and
weather-related threats, policies may include those that
seek to limit the short-term impact when shocks occur,
help the economy recover faster, and reduce vulnerability to future shocks. Policies reinforce each other to
achieve these goals. For example, countries with buffers
(fiscal and monetary space, large international reserves,
access to foreign aid) and well-targeted social safety
nets may be better placed to deliver support to people
affected by weather shocks, thus smoothing consumption in the short term. Adjusting to weather shocks
and climate change will likely require reallocating people and capital across sectors and regions as production
and trade patterns shift. Policies and institutions that
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

131

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 3.12. Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: A Toolkit

Macroeconomic and Structural Policies
to Build Resilience to Shocks

Enhance ability to smooth
the impact of the shocks
Policy buffers
To enable policy response
Well-targeted social
safety nets
To effectively support
those affected
Exchange rate ﬂexibility
To cushion some of the
economic cost of the
shock

Adaptation Strategies to Speciﬁc
Climate Change Risks

Enhance ﬂexibility and
foster structural
transformation

Mitigate risks by reducing
exposure and vulnerability
Public information provision
about climate-related risks

Labor market policies
To facilitate labor
movement across
production sectors and
regions

Early warning systems and
evacuation schemes

Education and health
policies
To strengthen human
capital, facilitate lifelong
learning, and develop a
ﬂexible and resilient labor
force
To reduce vulnerability

Stronger building laws, land use
planning, and zoning rule; and better
regulation of the use of common
resources (for example, water)

Transfer and
share risks

Migration

Private and sovereign
insurance (for example,
parametric insurance,
crop insurance,
catastrophe bonds)

Multilateral risk-sharing
mechanisms

Fiscal incentives and appropriate
pricing for the development and
adoption of appropriate
technologies (for example,
resistant crops, air-conditioning,
housing improvements)

Financial sector policies
To ensure access to credit, insurance, and other
ﬁnancial services needed by households to smooth
consumption
To enable ﬁrms to invest, develop new technologies,
and so forth

Climate-smart infrastructure
investment (for example, irrigation,
drainage, seawalls)

Infrastructure investment

Strong Institutional Framework
Source: IMF staff compilation.

facilitate the needed reallocation, such as those that
ensure access to finance, labor market flexibility, and
investment in human capital and infrastructure, could
speed up recovery and foster the structural transformation necessary to reduce vulnerability.30
Mitigating the risks associated with climate change
will also require some very specific adaptation policies
to help countries reduce their exposure and vulnerability to climatic events. Once the key climate change
risks are identified for a particular location, both “soft”
and “hard” adaptation measures can be applied (Hallegatte 2009). Soft measures may include strengthening

public information provision, building codes, and
land use and zoning laws, and devising warning and
evacuation systems, along with targeted incentives for
climate-related technologies (such as air-conditioning)
and transferring and sharing risks related to weather
events (such as natural disasters, which may increase in
frequency) through financial markets. Hard measures
may include investment in climate-smart infrastructure, such as retrofitting properties and building (or
upgrading) irrigation or drainage systems, building
seawalls, and the like.31 Appropriate adaptation measures are highly specific to the climate-related risks in

30The classification of policies presented in Figure 3.12 is rather
loose. Greater financial access could help farmers both smooth
consumption when higher temperatures damage crops and invest
in the technology needed to prevent future damage (such as buying
heat-resistant seeds).

31See Hallegatte (2009); Hallegatte, Lecocq, and de Perthuis
(2011); IPCC (2014); Cabezon and others (2015); OECD (2015a);
Farid and others (2016); Hallegatte and others (2016); IMF (2016a);
and IMF (2016b) for a comprehensive discussion of various climate
change adaptation strategies.

132

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

each location and national circumstances; the infrastructure requirements for a flood-prone area would be
vastly different from those of an area that is frequently
exposed to droughts. This specificity, together with lack
of comparable data on adaptation measures, precludes
cross-country empirical analysis. Case studies of
adaptation strategies, however, could prove insightful
and are presented in Box 3.3. Box 3.4 discusses the
role of financial markets in sharing and transferring
weather-related risks.
Important synergies exist between general macroeconomic and structural policies and specific adaptation
strategies: economic and institutional development
will likely strengthen a country’s capacity to cope with
climate change and to invest in specific adaptation
strategies. For example, stronger institutions will make
enforcement of soft measures more effective, while fiscal
space will enable the investment in needed infrastructure. Conversely, some adaptation strategies, such as
efficient water use, climate-resilient housing, or activity
diversification could facilitate development even in the
absence of climate change (Farid and others 2016).
Finally, as adaptation strategies reach their limits,
economic agents could respond to persistent changes
in climate and the associated loss in income by relocating geographically.

The Role of Domestic Policies and Institutions:
Empirical Evidence
To study the extent to which macroeconomic and
structural policies and country characteristics mute
the effect of weather shocks, the analysis extends the
empirical approach described above. It does so by
allowing the response of per capita output to weather
shocks to vary with various proxies for these policy and
institutional settings, which are included one at a time
in the analysis.32 It is important to emphasize that,
whereas fluctuations in temperature and precipitation
are truly exogenous, which allows their causal impact
to be identified, variations in policies and institutions
across countries and over time are not. Accordingly,
estimated correlations should be interpreted as being
merely suggestive of causal impact.
32More specifically, the estimated specification augments equation
(3.2) to include an interaction term between the weather shock and
the policy variable. For simplicity, the sample is restricted to countries with average temperature exceeding 15°C, in which an increase
in temperature has a statistically significant linear negative impact on
economic activity. See Annex 3.3 for further details.

The results suggest that having the right policies
and institutions in place may help attenuate the effects
of temperature shocks, to some extent. The instantaneous effect of a temperature shock is slightly smaller
in countries with lower public debt, higher inflows of
foreign aid, and greater exchange rate flexibility. The
presence of monetary buffers (proxied by having below
double-digit inflation) or international reserves makes
no notable difference (Figure 3.13). However, the
extent of attenuation that buffers provide is estimated
to be small and short lived.
The evidence is somewhat more compelling for structural policies and country characteristics that are typically deemed important for easing sectoral reallocation
of factors of production and structural transformation
in general. Although the uncertainty surrounding the
empirical estimates is often very large, the medium-term
adverse effect of a temperature increase appears to fade
when domestic and international financial markets are
better regulated, the exchange rate is flexible, infrastructure is widely available, democratic institutions are
strong, and the distribution of income is fairly even—
that is, in more-developed economies (Figure 3.14).
Patterns uncovered in the data broadly mirror simulations of a dynamic structural general equilibrium
model, which can properly isolate the causal effects of
the availability of buffers, costs of capital adjustment,
quality of institutions, and investment in adaptation
strategies (Box 3.2). They are also in line with the
empirical findings that show less damage from extreme
weather events and natural disasters in countries where
exchange rates are flexible, financial services are readily
available, and institutions are strong.33,34
33See Kahn (2005); Noy (2009); McDermott, Barry, and Tol
(2013); Burgess and others (2014); and Felbermayr and Gröschl
(2014) for the role of financial development, and Von Peter, Dahlen,
and Saxena (2012); Breckner and others (2016); and Lee, Villaruel,
and Gaspar (2016) for the role of insurance penetration. Kahn
(2005), Noy (2009), and Felbermayr and Gröschl (2014) find evidence for the role of institutions, and Ramcharan (2009) examines
the role of exchange rates in reducing damage from extreme weather
events and natural disasters.
34Two studies make a compelling case for the importance of
sectoral reallocation in alleviating output losses from climate change.
When quantifying the effects of climate change on agricultural
markets using micro data from 1.7 million fields around the world,
Costinot, Donaldson, and Smith (2016) find that the welfare losses
would be three times larger if farmers were unable to switch production in response to changing climatic conditions and comparative
advantage. In an empirical study, Colmer (2016) establishes that
labor movements from agriculture into manufacturing in India can
significantly offset the aggregate economic losses associated with
weather-driven changes in agricultural productivity.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

133

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 3.13. Role of Policy Buffers

Figure 3.14. Role of Structural Policies and Institutions

(Percent; years on x-axis)

(Percent; years on x-axis)

There is some suggestive evidence that the contemporaneous effect of
temperature on per capita output is marginally lower in countries with lower public
debt, greater foreign aid inﬂows, and ﬂexible exchange rates.

There is some suggestive evidence that the medium-term effect of an increase in
temperature on per capita output is marginally lower in countries with betterregulated ﬁnancial markets, greater physical capital, more democratic institutions,
and lower income inequality.

0.5 1. Public Debt
0.0

2. Inﬂation

Low debt to GDP
High debt to GDP

–0.5

0.5

Below double digit
Above double digit

0.0
–0.5

–1.0

–1.0

–1.5

–1.5

–2.0

–2.0

–2.5
–1 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

0.5 3. International Reserves
0.0

–1 0

1

2

4

5

6

4. Foreign Aid

More than four
months of imports

–0.5

3

–2.5
7
0.5

High foreign aid
Low foreign aid

0.0
–0.5

–1.0

–1.0

–1.5

–1.5
Less than four
months of imports

–2.0
–2.5
–1 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

–2.0
7 –1 0

0.5 5. Remittances
0.0

1

2

3

4

5

6

6. Exchange Rate Flexibility

0.5
0.0

High remittances
Low remittances

–0.5

–2.5
7

–0.5

–1.0

–1.0

–1.5

–1.5
Not pegged
Pegged

–2.0
–2.5
–1 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

–1 0

1

2

3

4

–2.0
5

6

–2.5
7

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The panels depict how the effect of a 1°C increase in temperature on per
capita output in the sample of countries with average temperature exceeding 15°C
varies with the empirical proxy of a policy buffer. Horizon 0 is the year of the shock.
Gray areas indicate that the blue and red lines are signiﬁcantly different from each
other at the 15 percent level. See Annex 3.3 for the exact deﬁnition of policy
variables.

134

2. International Finance

0.5 1. Domestic Financial
Sector Reform
0.0
High ﬁnancial sector
liberalization
–0.5

0.5
0.0

Low restrictions on
capital account

–0.5

–1.0

–1.0

–1.5
–2.0
–2.5
–1 0

Low ﬁnancial sector
liberalization
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

–1 0

1

2

3

4

–2.0
5

6

4. Physical Capital

0.5 3. Human Capital
0.0

–1.5

High
restrictions on
capital account

0.5
0.0

High human capital
Low human capital

–0.5

–0.5

–1.0

–1.0
High prevalence
of paved roads
Low prevalence
of paved roads

–1.5
–2.0
–2.5
–1 0

–2.5
7

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

–1 0

1

3

4

–2.0
5

6

6. Inequality

0.5 5. Political Regime
0.0

–2.5
7
0.5
0.0

Low Gini
High Gini

High polity score
Low polity score

–0.5

2

–1.5

–0.5

–1.0

–1.0

–1.5

–1.5

–2.0

–2.0

–2.5
–1 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

–1 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

–2.5
7

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The panels depict how the effect of a 1°C increase in temperature on per
capita output in the sample of countries with average temperature exceeding 15°C
varies with the empirical proxies of structural policies and institutional settings.
Horizon 0 is the year of the shock. Gray areas indicate that the blue and red lines
are signiﬁcantly different from each other at the 15 percent level. See Annex 3.3
for the exact deﬁnition of policy variables.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

An alternative approach to assessing whether development more broadly reduces vulnerability to weather
shocks takes advantage of subnational cross-country
data. It is difficult to establish definitively whether
advanced economies experience a smaller marginal
effect of heat on macroeconomic performance,
because so few of them have hot climates. However,
some of the larger advanced economies, such as the
United States, span several climate zones.35 This
within-country geographic heterogeneity makes it
possible to compare whether economic activity in
the “hot” states or provinces of advanced economies
responds to a temperature increase in the same way as
economic activity does in states or provinces of emerging market and developing economies with a similar
average temperature. Indeed, analysis suggests that
temperature shocks hurt hot areas in emerging market
and developing economies significantly more than
those in advanced economies (Figure 3.15). Thus, economic development seems, to some extent, to insulate
countries from the vagaries of the weather.36

The Role of Migration
Migration is another possible adaptation strategy
for households hurt by weather shocks and persistent
changes in climate—one with important cross-border
spillovers. Theoretically, the impact of weather shocks
on migration is ambiguous (see Dell, Jones, and Olken
2014). Although lower incomes, safety concerns, and
physiological discomfort are powerful incentives to
relocate, the adverse income effect of weather shocks
may undermine households’ ability to pay for transport
and other relocation expenses (Bryan, Chowdhury, and
Mobarak 2014; Carleton and Hsiang 2016).37 Several
empirical studies have documented adaptation to
weather shocks and natural disasters through migration
35Average

annual temperatures in the US states of Maine and
Texas are about 7°C and 21°C, respectively.
36Data constraints prevent the identification of the precise channels through which development attenuates the link between weather
and overall economic performance. Economic activity in hot areas in
advanced economies may be more insulated from temperature shocks
given that households exposed to these shocks have better access
to ex post coping mechanisms (such as social protection) or have
reduced their vulnerability to shocks through ex ante adaptation
strategies (such as activity diversification, adoption of air-conditioning, and the like).
37Lack of knowledge and uncertainty about the risks caused by
slowly changing climate conditions (Lee and others 2015) as well as
the provision of government assistance to disaster-prone areas may
also result in minimal behavioral change (Baez and others 2017).

Figure 3.15. Role of Development: Evidence from
Subnational Data
(Percent; years on x-axis)

The adverse effect of an increase in temperature on output is more pronounced in
non-advanced economies.
Advanced economies

Non-advanced economies

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
–2.0
–2.5
–1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure depicts how the effect of a 1°C increase in temperature in the
sample of states or provinces with average temperature exceeding 15°C varies
with an indicator of whether the state or province is located in an advanced
economy. Horizon 0 is the year of the shock. Gray area indicates that the blue and
red lines are signiﬁcantly different from each other at the 15 percent level.

within country borders.38 Evidence of international
migration responses is scarcer and typically focuses on
flows from individual countries.39
The analysis builds on Cattaneo and Peri (2016)
and examines whether weather shocks and natural
38See Gray and Mueller (2012b) for evidence from Bangladesh;
and Boustan, Kahn, and Rhode (2012); Feng, Oppenheimer, and
Schlenker (2012); Hornbeck (2012); and Hornbeck and Naidu
(2014), among others, for evidence from the United States. Deryugina (2011), on the other hand, finds no population response in
the 10 years following a hurricane landfall in the United States, but
documents a substantial increase in government transfer payments.
39Munshi (2003), for example, finds that more migrants move
from Mexico to the United States when rainfall is lower in a given
Mexican community—a pattern also confirmed by Feng, Krueger,
and Oppenheimer (2010). Country-specific evidence also includes
Ethiopia (Gray and Mueller 2012a), Indonesia (Bohra-Mishra,
Oppenheimer, and Hsiang 2014), Pakistan (Mueller, Gray, and
Kosec 2014), and Syria (Kelley and others 2015). Barrios, Bertinelli,
and Strobl (2006) and Marchiori, Maystadt, and Schumacher (2012)
provide evidence from several countries in sub-Saharan Africa.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

135

7

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 3.16. Effect of Temperature and Natural Disasters on
International Migration
(Percentage points of origin country’s total population)
Among the sample of countries with average temperature exceeding 15°C, an
increase in temperature and greater incidence of natural disasters induce
migration, but only from non-low-income developing countries.
2. Number of Natural
Disasters

18.0 1. Temperature
16.0

1.2
1.0

14.0
0.8

12.0
10.0

0.6

8.0
0.4

6.0
4.0

0.2

2.0
0.0

0.0
–2.0

Emerging
market
economies

Low-income
developing
countries

Emerging
market
economies

–0.2
Low-income
developing
countries

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Estimates from a panel regression of the effects of a 1°C increase in 10-year
average temperature and number of natural disasters on the share of emigrants.
See Annex 3.4 for further details on the data, speciﬁcation, and estimation.
Vertical lines denote 90 percent conﬁdence intervals.

disasters trigger emigration.40 The findings suggest
that a rise in temperature and greater incidence of
weather-related disasters induce emigration, but only
from countries where people can generally afford to
leave, which confirms Cattaneo and Peri’s (2016)
results (Figure 3.16; Annex Table 3.4.1). Households
in low-income developing countries, which tend
to have limited access to savings and credit, appear
trapped by weather-induced income shocks (see Black
and others 2011; Chen and others 2017). This interpretation is consistent with the findings of Hallegatte
and others (2016) that the poorest households in
40Focusing on the sample of countries with average annual
temperature of at least 15°C, as in the section titled “The Role
of Domestic Policies and Institutions: Empirical Evidence,” the
analysis relates the share of emigrants from a country to its average
temperature, precipitation, and incidence of natural disasters over a
10-year period, controlling for time-invariant country characteristics
and global and region-specific decadal shocks. See Annex 3.4 for
further details.

136

low-income countries tend to be the most exposed
and vulnerable to climate change. These are also
precisely the households with the fewest resources
available to finance relocation.
Substantial migration flows, potentially spilling
across country borders, could arise if climate change
leads to a significant rise in sea levels. Hundreds of
millions of people in low-lying areas could become
vulnerable to flooding, forcing them to abandon their
homes and relocate (Usery, Choi, and Finn 2007,
2009). In the United States alone, more than 4 million
people living in coastal areas could be affected if oceans
rise the 80 centimeters the IPCC projects by 2100
under the unmitigated climate change scenario. If the
rise in sea levels is twice as much, the affected population would exceed 13 million (Hauer, Evans, and
Mishra 2016).

International Support
Climate change is a global externality, and countries
will not be able to deal with its causes or its consequences on their own. Both equity and efficiency
arguments call for active support from the international community in helping low-income countries
plan, fund, and implement adaptation measures to
cope with the consequences of climate change without
compromising developmental objectives. On equity
grounds, low-income countries have contributed only
marginally to greenhouse gas emissions, yet they are
the most vulnerable to their harmful consequences,
as this chapter demonstrates. On efficiency grounds,
requiring countries that have and/or are currently contributing substantially to the atmospheric greenhouse
gas concentration to bear some of the adaptation costs
of low-income countries will help offset polluters’ failure to fully internalize the cost of greenhouse gas emissions. And while the benefits of adaptation are largely
domestic, successfully coping with weather shocks and
climate change could avert significant cross-border
spillovers, for example by stemming climate-induced
population migration.
Support from the international community in the
form of concessional climate finance will be crucial to
mobilize the resources necessary to build resilience to
climate change in low-income countries (see Box 3.6).
The commitment by advanced economies to jointly
contribute $100 billion a year by 2020 for mitigation
and adaptation in developing economies, which was
further strengthened by the 2015 Paris Agreement,

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

is an important step in that regard.41 In addition to
financial assistance, the transfer of appropriate adaptation and clean technologies to low-income countries
can further enhance their efforts to cope with climate
change by improving access to state-of-the-art technology, skills, and knowledge. Several initiatives under the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change have promoted the international exchange
of knowledge related to good practices in adaptation
(such as the Adaptation Learning Mechanism), which
can be integrated into national and local plans. Multilateral risk-sharing mechanisms, such as the Caribbean
Catastrophic Risk Insurance Facility and the African
Risk Capacity, can also help countries with emergency
response in the immediate aftermath of a disaster, as
discussed in Boxes 3.3 and 3.4.
Cognizant of the challenges posed by climate change,
the IMF, among other international financial institutions,
offers direct technical and financial support to small
states and other countries that are vulnerable to weather
conditions. To foster adaptation, it provides policy advice
and capacity building on how to enhance macroeconomic and risk management frameworks, determine
the appropriate balance between self-insurance and risk
transfer, and strengthen investment and growth to build
resilience.42 The IMF has also increased vulnerable countries’ annual access limits under the Rapid Credit Facility
and Rapid Financing Instrument to provide rapid assistance to countries with urgent payment needs, including
as a result of natural disasters (IMF 2016b).

public debt for a representative small open low-income
country. The model also highlights the role that structural transformation of low-income countries (that
is, making the transition from agriculture to a more
services-based economy) could play in attenuating the
impact of climate change. Box 3.5 complements the
analysis by reviewing the evidence on the long-term
effects of historical climate on economic performance.
Simulations are based on the Debt, Investment, and
Growth (DIG) model of Buffie and others (2012),
which captures aspects pertinent to low-income
countries—such as low public investment efficiency
and high capital adjustment costs—and can be
extended easily to incorporate the structural transformation process.43 These aspects of the DIG model
make it preferable for studying the impact of climate
change in low-income countries relative to the Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs) more commonly
used to assess climate change effects.44
In the DIG model, firms combine labor, private
capital, and infrastructure to produce output. Consumers
supply labor and derive utility from consuming traded
and nontraded goods, while the government collects revenue, redistributes income, and invests in infrastructure,
which it funds through domestic and external borrowing,
grants, and remittances. Based on the empirical results,
changes in the exogenously-given sector-specific total
factor productivity (TFP) levels are modeled as quadratic
functions of temperature, while all other parameters are
calibrated broadly as in Buffie and others (2012).45

Long-Term Effects of Temperature Increase—A
Model-Based Approach

43For a detailed description of the model, see Buffie and others
(2012) and Annex 3.5.
44The three best-known IAMs are the Dynamic Integrated
Climate-Economy (DICE) model; the Climate Framework for Uncertainty, Negotiation, and Distribution model; and the Policy Analysis
of the Greenhouse Effect model. RICE is a DICE model that includes
regions and AD-DICE is a variant of DICE that includes adaptation.
Anthoff and Tol (2010), Hope (2011), and Nordhaus and Sztorc
(2013) provide descriptions of these models. Existing IAMs are typically
not geographically granular enough, lumping together economies with
different income levels and average temperatures. They include various
feedback loops among emissions, growth, and climate that are less relevant for low-income countries. And they are typically not well suited to
analyzing sectoral issues and structural economic transformation.
1
1
45In particular, TFP
t + 1 − TFPt = ​β​1​(Tt + 1 − Tt) + ​2 ​β​2​​  (Tt + 1 −Tt) ​
T​t​+​ ΔTFP​t​ *​, in which ​ΔTFP​t*​​ is the TFP growth rate that would
prevail under no climate change, assumed to be 2.8 percent based on
the WEO medium-term growth forecast for low-income countries.
β11 and β12 are the estimated coefficients on the linear and squared
temperature terms in equation (3.2), as reported in column (5) of
Annex Table 3.3.1, rescaled to match the modeled decline of GDP
when temperature increases by 1°C, and Tt is the average annual
temperature for the median low-income country at time t, where the
initial temperature is set at 25°C.

Empirical work in this chapter so far has assessed
the macroeconomic effects of weather shocks in the
short and medium term. This section incorporates
these estimates into a dynamic general equilibrium
model to shed light on the potential long-term effects
of temperature increases on GDP, investment, and
41Estimates

vary, but there is general agreement that adaptation
needs in developing economies are on the order of billions of dollars a
year (Margulis and Narain 2010; UNEP 2016). The Paris Agreement
reiterates and extends developed economies’ commitment to jointly
mobilize $100 billion a year by 2020: advanced economies are strongly
urged to scale up their efforts with a concrete road map for achieving
the goal and, by 2025, are expected to set a new collective, quantified
goal from a floor of $100 billion a year (Farid and others 2016).
42The IMF completed its first Climate Change Policy Assessment in June 2017 in collaboration with the World Bank for
Seychelles (IMF 2017).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

137

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 3.17. Long-Term Impact of Temperature Increase for
a Representative Low-Income Developing Country: Model
Simulations
Model simulations suggest that the increase in temperature projected under the
intermediate and the unmitigated climate change scenarios could have signiﬁcant
economic consequences for a representative low-income developing country, with
sizable downside risks.

Intermediate Scenario
(RCP 4.5)
Midpoint
6 1. GDP
(Percent deviation
4
from trend)
2
0
–2
–4
–6
–8
–10
–12
–14
–16
2017
40
60
80
56 3. Public Debt
(Percent of GDP)
54

Unmitigated Climate Change
Scenario (RCP 8.5)
95 percent conﬁdence interval
2. GDP
(Percent deviation
from trend)

2100 2017

40

60

80

4. Public Debt
(Percent of GDP)

6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
–8
–10
–12
–14
–16
2100
56
54

52

52

50

50

48

48

46

46

44

44

42

42

40
2017

40

60

80

2100 2017

40

60

80

40
2100

6. Investment
9 5. Investment
9
(Percent deviation from
(Percent deviation from
6
6
trend investment rate)
trend investment rate)
3
3
0
0
–3
–3
–6
–6
–9
–9
–12
–12
–15
–15
–18
–18
–21
–21
2017
40
60
80
2100 2017
40
60
80 2100
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: RCP = Representative Concentration Pathways.

138

The effects of climate change are examined through
simulations of the macroeconomic response of output,
the public-debt-to-GDP ratio, and private investment
to the temperature increases projected under two
of the scenarios prepared by the IPCC, as discussed
in the “Projections” subsection of this chapter. The
simulations suggest that under both scenarios, the
representative low-income country will experience
sizable economic losses relative to a baseline of no
changes in temperature, with significant downside risks
(Figure 3.17).
Under the milder scenario, the increase in temperature will lower output by 4 percent by 2100
and depress private investment by 5 percent as
firms respond to lower productivity from rising
temperatures by cutting back capital spending. The
relative decline in output implies an increase in the
public-debt-to-GDP ratio of 2 percentage points by
2100. Under the unmitigated climate change scenario,
the macroeconomic effect would be much larger.
Output would fall short by close to 9 percent relative
to no climate change, private investment would fall by
11 percent, and the public-debt-to-GDP ratio would
rise by 5 percentage points by 2100.46
Conversely, the adverse effect would be significantly
smaller if the rise in temperature is successfully contained to less than 2°C, as stipulated in the 2015 Paris
Agreement, underscoring the critical importance of
mitigation efforts in limiting climate change damage.
Box 3.6 discusses recent developments in climate mitigation efforts.
There is great uncertainty surrounding these central
projections because empirical estimates of the effect
of temperature shocks are imprecise and temperature
projections are uncertain. As a result, wide confidence
intervals surround this chapter’s central projections.47
There is a 2.5 percent chance of output declining more
than 8 percent below the trend under the milder scenario and more than 16 percent under the unmitigated
climate change scenario. In line with lower output,
public debt would increase significantly relative to
output (about 10 percent of GDP under the worst-case
scenario), and the private-investment-to-GDP
46These results are broadly in line with other model-based estimates of the impact of climate change as discussed in Tol (2009).
For a survey of estimates of climate change damage at the global
level, see Tol (2014) and Nordhaus and Moffat (2017).
47The construction of confidence intervals is detailed in
Annex 3.5. These intervals do not account for stochastic variations in
the weather or fat-tail events.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

ratio could plummet by as much as 20 percent
below the trend.
An alternative way to quantify climate change
damage for a representative low-income country is to
compute the present value of the shortfall in economic
output relative to the baseline of no climate change
and to express this present value as a share of current
output.48 Using a moderate growth-adjusted discount
rate of 1.4 percent, the present value of output losses
is large, at 48 percent and 100 percent of current
output under the RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 scenarios,
respectively.
The above simulations assume a static economic
structure. However, as seen in the “Channels of
Impact” subsection, rising temperatures affect some
economic sectors more than others. For example, compared with agriculture, the services sector is relatively
sheltered from the adverse effects of higher temperature. Hence, structural economic transformation from
a mostly agrarian to a more services-based economy
could lower the economic cost of climate change. The
analysis extends the baseline DIG model to include an
exogenous process of reallocating labor from agriculture and manufacturing to services. The pace of
structural transformation is assumed to be moderate
and replicates past trends for low-income countries:
in the absence of shocks, the employment share of the
services sector rises by 2.5 percentage points a decade.
Simulations in this extended model indicate that over
the long term, for the median low-income country,
structural transformation can reduce the cost of climate
change by about 25 percent and 30 percent under the
RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 scenarios, respectively.
The potential impact of climate change quantified
in this section is subject to important caveats. First,
extrapolating from the short- to medium-term causal
effects of weather shocks estimated from historical data
to the long-term impact of potential global warming
may overstate the case if persistent changes in climate
induce agents to adapt their economic activity to the
new environment. Conversely, permanent changes in
climate may have consequences that fluctuations in
annual weather do not. Moreover, the model does not
capture the effects of extreme weather events, which
inflict long-lasting macroeconomic damage, as demon48In

line with Nordhaus (2010), the real interest rate is assumed
to be 4.25 percent, giving a growth-adjusted discount rate of
1.4 percent. A more extreme discount rate of 0.1 percent, proposed
by Stern (2007), would increase the present value of damage by an
order of magnitude.

strated in Box 3.1 in the case of tropical cyclones, and
could increase in frequency, potentially amplifying the
damage they cause. Certain expected or possible events
(such as rising sea levels) have no historic precedents
from which to draw inference but may have very significant economic consequences for many low-income
countries, which are also not quantified in the simulations. Moreover, the long-term projections do not
incorporate several of the channels through which
temperature increases, and climate change in general,
could affect economic activity, such as declining labor
supply from higher mortality and migration.
Even abstracting from these difficulties, considerable
uncertainty exists about how to incorporate the empirical estimates of economic losses into the dynamic
general equilibrium model. The analysis in this chapter
has taken a very conservative approach and assumes
that weather shocks have a permanent effect on the
level of output. However, several studies have argued
that the empirical evidence is not inconsistent with
a persistent effect on the growth rate of output (Dell,
Jones, and Olken 2012; Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel
2015a). Because even a small growth effect would
ultimately dwarf a level effect, the adverse consequence
of temperature increases for the median low-income
country would be many times larger if rising temperatures were incorporated into the model as affecting the
growth path of output.49

Summary and Policy Implications
Coping with climate change is one of the fundamental challenges of the 21st century, and this
challenge looms particularly large for low-income
developing economies. This chapter documents the
extraordinarily fast rise in temperature over the past
century across advanced, emerging market, and
low-income developing economies and the significant
warming that could occur by the end of this century,
depending on the international community’s ability
49Burke,

Hsiang, and Miguel (2015a) estimate much larger damages from climate change for hot countries: they model temperature
increases as having a persistent effect on the growth rate, rather than
the level of output. Permanent growth effects could arise if weather
shocks scar productivity growth through their effects on institutions,
innovation, or human capital accumulation. Several studies have
found evidence of effects of weather shocks on outcomes that could
plausibly shape productivity growth (for example, the link between
weather and conflict or weather and educational attainment), but
it is difficult to establish empirically how long the growth damage
through this channel lasts.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

139

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

to contain greenhouse gas emissions. Low-income
developing countries, which tend to be in some of
the hottest parts of the planet and are projected to
experience sizable increases in temperature, have contributed very little to the atmospheric concentration of
greenhouse gases.
Yet the analysis suggests that rising temperatures
have highly uneven macroeconomic effects, with the
adverse consequences borne disproportionately by
countries with hot climates, such as most low-income
developing countries. The chapter finds that a rise
in temperature lowers per capita output in countries
with high average temperatures, in both the short and
medium term, through a wide array of channels. In
areas with hot climates, higher temperatures reduce
agricultural output, lower productivity of workers
exposed to the heat, slow the rate of capital accumulation, and damage health. These findings reflect impacts
of weather shocks on average country outcomes. But
weather shocks could also have sizable unfavorable
distributional consequences within a country. Poor
households tend to be more vulnerable to weather
fluctuations as a result of their heavy reliance on agricultural income, higher proportion of income devoted
to food items, and limited access to savings and credit
(Hallegatte and others 2016; Hallegatte and Rozenberg
2017; IMF 2016b). Despite the significant warming
that has occurred over the past century, the sensitivity
of per capita output to temperature shocks has not
changed materially, pointing to significant constraints
to adaptation.
The negative effects of projected climate change
for low-income countries could be large. Focusing on
one particular aspect of climate change—namely, the
projected rise in temperature—and under the conservative assumption that temperature increases affect the
level rather than the growth path of output, model
simulations suggest that, absent efforts to reduce global
emissions, the output of a representative low-income
country could be 9 percent lower than without an
increase in temperature, with considerable downside
risks.50 The significant uncertainty about the magnitude and effects of climate change—not only how
much temperatures will rise, but also how the environment will react—calls for careful consideration of these
downside risks.
50Moreover, the negative welfare consequences of changing climate
conditions will likely exceed output losses. Uncomfortably high
temperatures could spur investment as households adapt, but the
increase in economic activity may not improve welfare.

140

How can low-income countries cope with the
rise in temperatures they are set to experience over
the coming decades? Although causal interpretation
is difficult, the chapter finds that the sensitivity of
per capita output to temperature shocks varies with
several mediating factors, and these factors are fundamental to teasing out the chapter’s policy implications. Sound domestic policies and institutions, and
development in general, could play a role in partially
reducing the adverse effects of weather shocks. Having
policy buffers in place can help cushion some of the
negative effects of weather shocks by helping sustain
public investment at adequate levels. Policies and
institutional settings that facilitate the reallocation
of factors of production across economic sectors and
geographic regions and that foster development—such
as better access to domestic and international financial markets, high-quality infrastructure, and stronger
institutions—can increase resilience to weather shocks
to some extent. These policies and institutional settings
enable countries to recover faster from the negative
consequences of temperature increases and reduce their
exposure and vulnerability in the future. Investment in
adaptation strategies and projects—such as, for example, well-targeted social safety nets that can promptly
deliver support where needed, climate-smart infrastructure, and appropriate technology—could also reduce
some of the damage from climate change, as illustrated
by selected case studies.
But low-income countries have huge spending needs
and scarce resources to undertake the investments
necessary to cope with climate change. According to
United Nations estimates, attaining the Sustainable
Development Goals would require low-income countries to increase public spending by up to 30 percent
of GDP—an amount that likely exceeds the fiscal
space available in most countries (Baum and others
2017; Schmidt-Traub 2015). Low-income countries
also often lack the institutional setting, administrative
capacity, or political stability to implement appropriate macroeconomic policies or adaptation strategies
(Figure 3.18). Moreover, domestic policies alone
cannot fully insulate low-income countries from the
consequences of climate change as higher temperatures
push the biophysical limits of these countries’ ecosystems, potentially triggering more frequent epidemics,
famines, and other natural disasters, at the same time
fueling migration pressure and conflict risk. The
international spillovers from these impacts of climate
change in vulnerable countries could be very sizable.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Figure 3.18. Vulnerability to Temperature Increase and
Adaptation Prospects
Low-income developing countries, where the effect of temperature increase is
estimated to have the most pernicious effect, tend to have much lower climate
change adaptation capacity and readiness.
Low-income developing countries
Emerging market economies
Advanced economies

Effect of a 1°C increase in
temperature on per capita output

2.0

1. Adaptation Capacity Index (x-axis)

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
–2.0
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

0.9

1.0

Effect of a 1°C increase in
temperature on per capita output

2.0 2. Adaptation Readiness Index (x-axis)
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
–2.0
0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

Sources: Notre Dame Global Adaptation Index; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure depicts the estimated effect of a 1°C increase in temperature on
per capita output at horizon 0 against countries’ score for adaptation readiness
and adaptation capacity. A higher score indicates better adaptation capacity and
more readiness.

Given that low-income countries’ potential to
address the climate change challenge by themselves
is limited, the international community must play a
key role in providing and coordinating financial and
nonfinancial support to these countries (see Box 3.6).
Advanced and emerging market economies have contributed the lion’s share to actual and projected climate
change. Hence, helping low-income developing countries cope with the consequences of climate change
is both a humanitarian imperative and sound global
economic policy that helps offset countries’ failure to
fully internalize the costs of greenhouse gas emissions.
While the analysis in this chapter focused on the
impact of global warming in low-income countries, it
is important to note that all countries will increasingly
feel direct negative effects from unmitigated climate
change, through more frequent (and more damaging)
natural disasters (see Box 3.1), rising sea levels, loss
of biodiversity, and many other difficult-to-quantify
consequences. Warming will also begin to weigh on
growth in many advanced economies as their temperatures rise above optimal levels (see Annex Figure 3.6.1).
And even in countries where the effect might be
moderate or positive on average, climate change will
create winners and losers at both the individual and
sectoral levels. Moreover, the international spillovers
from the most vulnerable countries, through depressed
economic activity and potentially higher conflict and
migration flows, could be considerable. Going forward,
only a global effort to contain carbon emissions to levels consistent with an acceptable increase in temperature can limit the long-term risks of climate change
(Farid and others 2016; Hallegatte and others 2016;
IMF 2015; Stern 2015; IPCC 2014).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

141

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 3.1. The Growth Impact of Tropical Cyclones
Tropical cyclones, commonly known as hurricanes
in the Atlantic and as typhoons in the northwest
Pacific, are one of the most destructive forces of
nature.1 They caused damage of $548 billion (constant
2010 dollars) worldwide during 2000–14 (International Disasters Database [EM-DAT]; Guha-Sapir,
Below, and Hoyois 2015), almost three-quarters of
which occurred in advanced economies.2 This box
estimates the effect of tropical cyclones on economic
activity and discusses the possible consequences of
climate change through its effects on tropical cyclones
under an unconstrained greenhouse gas emissions
scenario (Representative Concentration Pathway 8.5).

Measuring Tropical Cyclones and
Empirical Estimation
Several studies have examined the macroeconomic
impact of tropical cyclones, typically finding significant economic damage.3 The analysis in this box
The author of this box is Sebastian Acevedo.
1A tropical cyclone is a rotating, organized system of clouds
and thunderstorms that originates over tropical or subtropical
waters and has a closed low-level circulation (NOAA 2017b).
Hurricane-strength winds (greater than 64 knots) can extend
beyond 200 miles for the largest storms.
2Storms cause more absolute damage in advanced economies
because their capital stocks tend to be more valuable; however, as
a percentage of GDP, damage is generally higher in small states
and low-income developing countries. The EM-DAT reports
damage for about half of the disasters caused by storms. Acevedo
(2016) finds that, in the Caribbean, economic damage caused by
tropical cyclones could be 1.6 to 3.6 times higher than reported.
3Raddatz (2009); Fomby, Ikeda, and Loayza (2013); and Acevedo (2014) use data from the EM-DAT to estimate the effects of
different types of natural disasters (including storms) on growth,
while a parallel body of literature (Strobl 2012; Bertinelli and
Strobl 2013; Hsiang and Jina 2014) uses wind-field models to
estimate the effects of storm winds on growth. Bakkensen and
Barrage (2016) use maximum wind speed at landfall, which is
closer to the approach used here.

combines detailed data on maximum sustained wind
speed and settlements’ population to construct a comprehensive database of tropical storms that took place
near centers of economic activity.4 Between 1950 and
2016, 4,597 storms passed within 100 miles of a city,
affecting 3,113 cities in 132 countries or territories.
Tropical cyclones affect countries of different sizes,
from small islands in the Caribbean and the Pacific
to large countries such as China, Mexico, and the
United States. When a storm strikes a small country,
it generally affects a large portion of its territory and
population, while the impact in larger countries can
be contained to relatively smaller areas. To account
for this difference, the wind variable—the maximum
sustained wind in knots within 100 miles of a country
(Windi,t)—is weighted by the share of the population exposed to all tropical cyclones in a year (Pi,t).
Storms also differ in the speed at which they move,
with slow-moving storms being potentially more
destructive. Thus, the wind variable is also weighted
by the share of a country’s time endowment exposed
to all storms within a year (TEi,t), in which the time
endowment is given as the product of the number of
hours in a year and the number of cities in a country. Table 3.1.1 summarizes the key elements of the
cyclone variables.
To estimate the effect of tropical cyclones on per
capita output, the analysis extends the local projection
empirical approach used in the chapter to include the

4The International Best Track Archive for Climate Stewardship contains data on 7,140 tropical cyclones, with information
on maximum sustained wind speed between 1950 and 2016
(Knapp, Applequist, and others 2010; Knapp, Kruk, and others
2010). These data are combined with the CIESIN (2016) settlements’ population in 2000, which contains data for 67,682 cities
that range in population from one person to 18.5 million people.

Table 3.1.1. Characteristics of the Average Tropical Cyclone by Country Group
MSW within 100 Miles
Exposed
Exposed Time
Distance
(knots)
Population
Endowment
(miles)
World
51.30
0.34
0.0005
77.05
Advanced Economies
58.56
0.28
0.0004
77.78
Emerging Market Economies
49.84
0.28
0.0004
76.27
Low-Income Developing Countries
42.45
0.20
0.0003
79.66
Small States
47.02
0.58
0.0009
71.26
Islands
54.43
0.49
0.0007
75.69
Sources: CIESIN GRUMPv1 Settlement Points r01; Ibtracs v03r09; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Maximum sustained winds (MSW) one minute average in knots per hour. Exposed population as a share of total population. Exposed time
endowment as a share of the total hours available in each country (24 hours × 365 days × cities). Distance is the average distance from each city
(within 100 miles of the storm) to the storm position where the wind was at its maximum.

142

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Box 3.1 (continued)
Table 3.1.2. Effect of Weather and Wind Shocks on Economic Activity
Real GDP per Capita Growth
Temperature
Temperature2
Precipitation
Precipitation2

(1)
1.347***
(0.357)
–0.051***
(0.011)
0.110
(0.104)
–0.003
(0.002)

(2)
0.931***
(0.222)
–0.038***
(0.010)
0.051
(0.104)
–0.002
(0.002)

Wind × Population × Time Endowment

(3)
0.920***
(0.223)
–0.037***
(0.010)
0.047
(0.106)
–0.001
(0.002)
–26.750**
(12.912)
0.18
96
4,696

Adjusted R 2
0.14
0.18
Number of Countries
189
96
Number of Observations
8,815
4,696
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: All regressions control for country and region-year fixed effects; lags and forwards of temperature, precipitation, and their squared terms;
and lag of growth. Column (3) also controls for the contemporaneous wind variable, as well as its lags and forwards. Column (1) replicates the
chapter’s baseline specification (column (5) in Annex Table 3.3.1). Columns (2) and (3) include only countries exposed to tropical cyclones.
Standard errors clustered at the country level.
* p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.

wind variable weighted by the share of population and
time exposed. The specification estimated is as follows:
yi,t + h − yi,t − 1 = ​​α​  h1(​ ​​ ​Wind​  i,t​​ ​Pi,t
​  ​​ ​TE​ i,t​​)​ 
+ ​α​  h2​ (​​ ​Wind​  i,t − 1​​ ​Pi,t
​  − 1​​ ​TE​ i,t − 1​​)​​
​  + h − j​​ ​TE​ i,t + h − j​​)​​
+ ​​∑ jh=−11​ ​​ ​α​  h3​ ​​ (​​ ​Wind​  i,t + h − j​​ ​Pi,t
+ ​​β​  h1​ ​​ ci,t + ​​β​  h2​ ​​ci,t − 1 + ​​∑ jh=−11​ ​​ ​β​  h3​ ​​ ci,t + h − j
+ ​​φ​  h1​ ​​Δyi,t − 1+ ​​µ​  hi​  ​​ + ​​θ​  hr,t ​​​  + ​​ε​  hi,t ​​,​ 

(3.1.1)

in which h indexes the estimation horizon, ​​µ​ hi​  ​​ are
country fixed effects, ​​θ​  hr,t ​​​  are region-year fixed effects,
yi,t is the log of GDP per capita, and ci,t refers to
average annual temperature and precipitation and their
squared terms.
The results presented in Table 3.1.2 indicate that
if the wind speed increased by one knot throughout
the entire country (that is, the entire population is
exposed), and for an entire year, real GDP per capita
would decline by 26.7 percent the year the storm
strikes. This, of course, is not a very useful indicator
of the effect of a typical storm on a country; a better
measure is the marginal effect of increasing wind speed
as captured by ​α ​Pi,t
​  ​​ ​TE​ i,t​​​.

Findings
Tropical cyclones have a significant negative effect on
output, with the biggest impact felt in small states and

islands that are generally more exposed to this type of
storm (Figure 3.1.1).5 By income group, advanced economies are the hardest hit by tropical cyclones because
they tend to be exposed to higher wind speeds.
The estimates are not only statistically, but also
economically, significant. Seven years after an average
storm strikes, per capita output is almost 1 percent
lower than if the storm had not happened, with
2.5 times larger losses experienced by small states
(Figure 3.1.2).6 The effects of storms are very persistent: even after 20 years, the economy has not fully
recovered from the shock.7 Notably, the effect of
tropical cyclones on economic activity is separate and
in addition to the effects of temperature (Table 3.1.2).
Introducing the wind variable does not materially
change the coefficients on temperature and precipitation for the same sample of countries.

Climate Change and Tropical Cyclones
Climate scientists predict that, with climate change,
there will be fewer tropical cyclones that form, but the
5For a discussion of small states’ vulnerability to natural disasters and climate change, see IMF (2016b).
6A storm strike includes any tropical cyclone that passed
within 100 miles of a city in a country.
7Hsiang and Jina (2014) find a similar response; in their case,
the decline in GDP is much larger, but the partial recovery starts
after 15 years.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

143

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 3.1 (continued)
Figure 3.1.1. Effect of Tropical Cyclone
Exposure on Real GDP per Capita

Figure 3.1.2. Cumulative Effect of Average
Tropical Cyclone on Real GDP per Capita after
Seven Years

(Percent; years on x-axis)

(Percent)
Estimate

90 percent conﬁdence interval

0.0
2. Advanced
Economies

0.04 1. World
0.02

0.04
0.02

0.00

0.00

–0.02

–0.02

–0.04

–0.04

–0.06

–0.06

–0.08

–0.08

–0.10
–1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
0.04 3. Emerging
Market
0.02
Economies

–0.10
–1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
4. Low-Income
Developing
Countries

0.04

0.00

–0.02

–0.02

–0.04

–0.04

–0.06

–0.06

–0.08

–0.08

0.04 5. Small States

–0.10
–1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
6. Islands

–1.0

–1.5
Average 1950–2016
RCP 8.5

–2.0

–2.5

0.02

0.00

–0.10
–1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

–0.5

0.04

–3.0

World

Emerging
Small states
markets
Advanced
Low-income
Islands
economies
developing
countries

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Cumulative effect after seven years on real GDP per
capita of the average tropical cyclone that each country
group is exposed to in terms of maximum wind speed,
exposed population, and exposed time endowment. RCP =
Representative Concentration Pathways.

0.02

0.02
0.00

0.00

–0.02

–0.02

–0.04

–0.04

–0.06

–0.06

–0.08

–0.08

–0.10
–1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

–0.10
–1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Cumulative impact of a one-knot increase in tropical
cyclone winds on real GDP per capita. Horizon 0 is the year
of the shock.

ones that do will be more intense and destructive
(Knutson and others 2010). In the unmitigated
climate change scenario (Representative Concentration
Pathway 8.5), sea surface temperature in 2090–2100 is
expected to increase by 2.6°C relative to 1995–2005,
which suggests that the maximum wind speed of tropical cyclones could increase by 9 percent.8 The analysis
in this box suggests that the average country would
suffer an additional 0.1 percent of per capita output
loss every time it is hit by an average tropical cyclone,
with smaller states experiencing 0.2 percent greater
damage (Figure 3.1.2).
8Sea surface temperature is a key ingredient in the formation
and development of tropical cyclones (Landsea 2004). A 1°C
increase in sea surface temperature raises maximum wind speed
by 3.5 percent (Knutson and Tuleya 2004).

144

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Box 3.2. The Role of Policies in Coping with Weather Shocks: A Model-Based Analysis
To illustrate how policies can help moderate the
consequences of weather shocks in low-income countries, this box uses the Debt, Investment, and Growth
(DIG) model developed by Buffie and others (2012)
and simulates the macroeconomic effects of temperature increases under various assumptions for key policy
variables.1 As demonstrated empirically in the chapter,
in hot countries, an increase in temperature reduces
productivity. Moreover, a temperature increase could
precipitate the loss of productive land. Consequently,
the analysis calibrates the weather damage to total factor productivity and private capital to broadly match
the estimated response of GDP to a 1°C increase in
temperature in a representative low-income country
with a baseline temperature of 25°C and examines
how this damage can be shaped by macroeconomic
and structural policies (Figure 3.2.1).2

Policy Space and the Role of Institutions
Weather shocks can weigh significantly on the
public purse of low-income countries. Government
revenues can be adversely affected by the reduction in
agricultural and industry output at the same time that
spending may need to be ramped up to deliver support
to affected households if weather shocks compromise
food security, to rebuild transport or communication
infrastructure if they are damaged by natural disasters,
and potentially to retrain the workforce. Because fiscal
space is often tight in many low-income countries,
expanding transfers from advanced economies—for
instance, through the transfers agreed to under the
Paris Agreement—could strengthen countries’ ability
to reduce the impact of weather shocks. Model simulations suggest that receiving additional transfers used to
build up public investment for three years, starting a
The authors of this box are Manoj Atolia, Claudio Baccianti,
Ricardo Marto, and Mico Mrkaic.
1The DIG model is a real, neoclassical, dynamic open economy framework with two production sectors that use public and
private capital as input and many features that are pertinent to
low-income countries, such as low public investment efficiency,
limited fiscal space, and capital adjustment costs. The model is
also used to simulate the long-term effects of climate change in
the section of the chapter titled “Long-Term Effects of Temperature Increase—A Model-Based Approach.”
2For simplicity, the traded and nontraded sectors are assumed
to react equally to weather shocks. The findings are robust to this
modeling choice. Most other parameters are calibrated as in Buffie and others (2012), except the real interest rate on public debt,
which is lower than in the original paper because of the decline
in global interest rates. See Annex 3.5 for further details.

Figure 3.2.1. Role of Policies: A ModelBased Analysis
(Real GDP, deviation from steady state;
years on x-axis)

2. Role of Fiscal
Space

1 1. Baseline

1

0

0

–1

–1
Baseline
Low grants
High grants

–2
–3
–1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 3. Role of Public
Sector Efﬁciency

–2

–3
–1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
4. Role of Capital
Adjustment
Costs

1
0

0
Baseline

–1

–1
–2

Baseline
High cost
Medium cost

Perfect efﬁciency
Typical efﬁciency
Low efﬁciency

–3
–1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

–2

–3
–1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
6. Role of Fiscal
Incentives for
Adaptation

1 5. Role of
Hysteresis

1

0

0
Baseline

–1
–2

–1
–2
Baseline
With adaptation

Medium hysteresis
High hysteresis

–3
–1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

–3
–1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The baseline assumes no additional grants in panels 2
and 3, low adjustment cost in panel 4, no hysteresis in panel
5, and no adaptation in panel 6. In panel 2, additional grants
amount to 0.5 percent of GDP in low grants scenario, and 1
percent of GDP in high grants scenario. In panel 3, all
simulations, except the baseline, assume high additional
grants.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

145

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 3.2 (continued)
year after the weather shock, could limit the damage of weather shocks to output (Figure 3.2.1, panel
2). Additional transfers of 1 percent of the recipient
country’s GDP reduce the depth of the recession by
about 0.5 percent throughout the simulation period.
Encouragingly, because the transfers increase the stock
of public infrastructure, thereby boosting productive
capacity in both sectors, they increase output not only
in the short term, but also in the long term.
Additional transfers benefit the recipient country,
but the size of the benefit depends crucially on the
efficiency of investment in public sector infrastructure, in particular, and on the quality of public sector
governance in general. Efficiency of public investment is low in many low-income countries, with
estimates of the share of expenditures on public infrastructure that truly increase the stock of public capital ranging from 20 percent to 60 percent (Hulten
1996; Pritchett 2000; Foster and Briceno-Garmendia
2010). The results of the simulations show that, in
countries with high public investment efficiency,
the receipt of additional transfers can effectively
dampen the adverse consequences of a weather shock
(Figure 3.2.1, panel 3). In countries with low public
investment efficiency, however, there is little difference between receiving and not receiving additional
transfers. In sum, the simulation shows convincingly
that low-income countries must continue to improve
the efficiency of public investment and strengthen
their institutional frameworks to reap the full benefit
of having buffers to counteract the effects of changing weather conditions.

Policies that Ease Factor Reallocation and
Structural Transformation
Weather shocks disrupt production, especially
in certain sectors of the economy, and adjusting to
these shocks would require reallocating workers and
capital across and within sectors. The speed and cost
at which these factors of production can be reallocated will influence how fast the economy can recover
after adverse shocks to total factor productivity or the
stock of capital.
In low-income countries, reallocation of capital
(and factors of production in general) can be hampered by rigid economic environments and suboptimal policies, for example, limited access to financial
markets, bureaucratic impediments (such as difficulties
in obtaining building permits), and legal uncertain-

146

ties.3 Simulations indicate that higher costs of capital
reallocation slow the recovery from weather shocks
(Figure 3.2.1, panel 4).4
The speed at which affected workers can be reallocated to alternative productive activities also matters.
Unemployment can cause hysteresis or permanent
“scarring” of productivity, given that workers lose
skills during long unemployment or underemployment episodes. This in turn could have long-lasting
consequences for economic performance. In the DIG
model, this channel is captured in the sensitivity of
productivity to lagged negative output gaps.5 The
results from simulations that vary this sensitivity
suggest that hysteresis could significantly prolong and
deepen the effects of weather shocks. Hence, policies
should aim to preserve human capital, including by
instituting programs that provide incentives to the
unemployed to participate in human-capital-preserving
activities, such as public works projects, as in the
Ethiopian Productive Safety Net Program, discussed in Box 3.3.

Investment in Adaptation Strategies
In addition to the general macroeconomic and structural policies discussed above, governments, households,
and firms engage in direct investments in adaptation
strategies in response to changing weather conditions
(for example, by planting more-heat-resistant crops or
investing in green infrastructure). Many adaptation
measures, however, have the nature of public goods.
Setting up an early-warning system for extreme heat,
instituting information campaigns about water conservation, or increasing vegetation in public areas and
other green infrastructure investments all have nonrival
3In the DIG model, the ease of factor reallocation is captured
in the cost of private capital adjustment parameter. The cost of
capital adjustment is inversely proportional to elasticity of investment with respect to Tobin’s q, in which higher elasticity implies
lower capital adjustment costs.
4The quantitative impact appears small, but the simulation
should be seen as a qualitative guide only. The size of the GDP
decline depends on the cost of capital adjustment as well as on
the shape and timing of the shock. If the climate shock results
mostly in the destruction of private capital and, to a lesser
extent in lowering total factor productivity, then the recovery is
slower and damage to GDP larger because of slower rebuilding of capital.
5The size of the effect is calibrated by using the estimated
elasticity of current wages to lagged hours worked by Altuğ and
Miller (1998). Their estimated elasticity of 0.2 stands for the
high degree of hysteresis in the model specification.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Box 3.2 (continued)
and nonexcludable payoffs. Because households and
firms are unable to internalize the full social benefits,
government involvement may be needed to provide
incentives to private agents to undertake adaptation
efforts toward socially optimal levels. In an extension
of the DIG model, the government introduces fiscal
incentives for the adoption of resilience-improving
technologies and finances the provision of public goods
related to weather risks, which lowers the sensitivity of
output to temperature increases. Assuming that private
adaptation expenditure falls 20 percent short of the

social optimum, and that government policy aims at
restoring optimality, simulations suggest that over 20
years, each $1 spent on adaptation by the government
reduces total weather damage by $2. The mechanism
behind this finding is private investment’s response to
the reduced weather-related productivity losses, which
boosts GDP in the medium and long term. The simulation illustrates a general principle that improving resilience through public adaptation spending can reduce
weather-driven downturns and accelerate recoveries
(Figure 3.2.1, panel 6).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

147

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 3.3. Strategies for Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: Selected Case Studies
Adverse effects of weather shocks and climate change
have motivated local communities and countries to
adapt and counter these unfavorable consequences. As
demonstrated in Figure 3.12, a wide range of strategies
could dampen the negative impacts of weather shocks
and natural disasters by reducing exposure and vulnerability or by transferring and sharing weather-related
risks. The purpose of this box is to showcase some
examples of successful coping strategies.

Social Safety Nets
Approximately 85 percent of the Ethiopian population is employed in agriculture, mostly on small
family-owned farms. Climate change and associated
droughts, delayed rains, and flooding weigh on agricultural productivity and food security. Furthermore,
in some areas, the land has become degraded due to
overuse. Consequently, approximately 10 percent of
the rural population is chronically food insecure.
To assist the at-risk population, the Ethiopian
government and international partners instituted the
Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP) in 2006. The
PSNP provides cash or food to households unable to
feed themselves all year, particularly in the lean season
(June–August). The aid is contingent on active participation in local productivity-enhancing or environmental
programs—for example, land rehabilitation, improvement of water sources, and construction of infrastructure such as roads and hospitals. A complementary
program, the Household Asset Building Program, which
targets the same households as the PSNP, helps households diversify their income sources and increase productive assets, including by offering technical assistance,
with the goal of achieving lasting food security.
With more than 7.6 million participants (or almost
8 percent of the Ethiopian population) and 47,000
small community projects every year, the PSNP is the
largest climate change adaptation program in Africa.
The community projects, which are mostly devoted
to environmental restoration, are offering measurably
positive results. The PSNP has reduced soil loss by more
than 40 percent and improved the quality and quantity
of available water. Studies suggest that land productivity has consequently increased by up to 400 percent.
In addition, the PSNP has reduced the damage from
seasonal flooding. The program has also improved the
The authors of this box are Claudio Baccianti and
Mico Mrkaic.

148

food security of vulnerable households—beneficiaries
of the PNSP experienced a 25 percent smaller drop in
consumption relative to those that were not covered
by the program in the aftermath of droughts (Porter
and White 2016). The PSNP has also reduced the
number of people in need of humanitarian intervention and the cost of such intervention. Finally, the
PSNP has increased savings of vulnerable households
and has facilitated improved access to educational and
health services.

Technology Adoption
High temperatures significantly lower labor productivity and could lead to adverse health outcomes—such
as increased incidence of hyperthermia and worsening
chronic cardiovascular or respiratory diseases—and
mortality, as demonstrated in a large body of work and
the analysis in this chapter. Governments and individuals have various options for reducing these adverse
economic and health impacts, such as green infrastructure (to increase the presence of vegetation in cities)
and specific construction technologies (for example,
roofs that are highly solar reflective). Among all options,
modern air-conditioning, invented at the turn of the
20th century, is the most common solution adopted by
households and firms to deal with excessive heat.
The benefits of climate control, both in the workplace and for health outcomes, are well documented.
In a 1957 survey, 90 percent of American firms named
cooled air as the single biggest boost to their productivity (Cooper 2002), and Singapore’s founding father,
Lee Kuan Yew, credited air-conditioning as the most
important factor in his country’s development success.
The dramatic decline in heat-related mortality over
the 20th century in the United States has also been
attributed to the adoption of residential air conditioning (Barreca and others 2016).
Nevertheless, the negative effects of air-conditioning
cannot be ignored. Increased adoption of indoor climate control increases energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. Exhaust from air-conditioning
machines and facilities can give rise to local pockets of
hot air, which can present significant negative externalities for nearby populations. High up-front costs
and infrastructure requirements make this technology
out of reach for poor and vulnerable populations,
especially in low-income developing countries.1
1As of 2012, slightly more than one-third of households had
access to electricity in the median low-income developing country.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Box 3.3 (continued)
Intelligent planning and implementation of
air-conditioning could reduce some of the negative
spillovers of this otherwise effective strategy for adapting to rising temperatures. A case in point is district
cooling—a centralized air-conditioning system—
which has been adopted in major cities in advanced
economies and is currently under construction in the
Gujarat International Finance Tec-City, a new business
district in Gujarat, India. With district cooling, chilled
water is produced at a central source and is distributed
to final consumers through underground pipes.
A centralized cooling system has clear environmental and economic advantages over decentralized
air-conditioning. The centralized production of
chilled water consumes 35 to 50 percent less energy
than individual air cooling units, reducing cost and
pollution. Higher energy efficiency, in turn, eases the
pressure the diffusion of air-conditioning puts on the
local electricity sector, which often lags the rapidly
growing demand for energy in emerging market and
developing economies. Finally, district cooling eliminates the up-front cost for final users, making indoor
climate control more accessible.
As in the provision of other types of infrastructure,
such as energy and water distribution, public sector
involvement could speed up the development and
expansion of district cooling systems, which could be
held back by low energy prices, insufficient demand
density, economic uncertainty, and other risks related
to the substantial up-front investment. The government of Gujarat has taken direct control of the
construction of the cooling distribution network, as
have the governments of the Republic of Korea, Qatar,
and Singapore.

Climate-Smart Public Infrastructure Investment
Flash floods in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, have
caused considerable property damage, impassable
traffic congestion, contamination of the water supply,
and loss of human life. To alleviate these problems, the
authorities embarked on an ambitious dual-purpose
infrastructure project that would help with both traffic
and flood water management.
The Stormwater Management and Road Tunnel
(SMART Tunnel) is a dual-purpose structure designed
to combat flash floods. A three-level tunnel combines
a two-level road tunnel and a storm drainage system
underneath. Under normal conditions, the drainage
level is closed and the tunnel is used as an ordinary

road traffic tunnel. However, the tunnel is designed so
that one or both traffic-carrying levels can be temporarily repurposed by being allowed to flood for use as
storm drains.
During moderate storms, the system reallocates the
lower traffic level to carry storm water, while the top
level can still be used by motorists. If the rainfall is
expected to be extreme, both traffic-carrying levels can
be closed to traffic, evacuated, and used as drains.
Cost-benefit analysis has demonstrated the effectiveness of the tunnel system. At a cost of about
$500 million, it is expected to prevent more than
$1.5 billion in flood damage and reduce the costs of
traffic congestion by more than $1 billion over the
next 30 years.

Early-Warning Systems and Evacuation Programs
Situated in the Ganges delta, Bangladesh is one
of the countries most vulnerable to climate change.
Annual floods typically inundate about one-fifth of the
country, leading to loss of life and property damage.2
Over the past 70 years, storms have caused thousands of deaths and millions of tons of crop damage,
and, because of climate change, the problems are
expected to worsen.
After the extraordinary damage caused by Cyclone
Sidr, the authorities and international partners
embarked on the Emergency Cyclone Recovery and
Restoration Project (ECRRP).3 The goals of the
ECRRP are to improve agricultural infrastructure and
long-term disaster preparedness, including by building
and reconstructing cyclone shelters and reinforcing
embankments. The program has meaningfully reduced
the risk of cyclone exposure of the vulnerable population by rebuilding about 240 cyclone shelters and
repairing more than 100 kilometers of embankments.
The ECRRP has also helped increase agricultural
resilience to climate shocks and helped improve the
livelihoods of the affected populations. In addition
to providing farmers with agricultural equipment,
saline-tolerant rice seeds, and training in crop diversification for better farm management, investments
in grain silos and livestock protection have reduced
the exposure of the agricultural production chain to
weather-related shocks.
2In extreme years, floods can affect up to three-quarters of the
land area in Bangladesh.
3The cyclone destroyed 1.5 million houses and damaged
1.3 million tons of crops.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

149

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 3.3 (continued)
Multilateral Risk-Sharing Mechanisms
Caribbean Catastrophic Risk Insurance Facility
Caribbean countries are regularly affected by tropical storms, extreme rainfall, earthquakes, and volcanic
eruptions. Because these shocks are, at least in part,
uncorrelated, risk sharing in the form of a regional
insurance pool can offer welfare improvements relative
to self-insurance or purchase of reinsurance by individual countries. The Caribbean Catastrophic Risk
Insurance Facility (CCRIF) is the world’s first regional
risk-pooling financial institution, offering insurance for the most prevalent natural disasters in the
region. It was formed in 2007 and currently includes
17 members.4
The CCRIF insures against tropical cyclones,
excessive rainfall, and earthquakes. All 17 participating
countries can purchase up to $100 million of coverage
for each category of risk. The program is designed
to finance emergency response, over the weeks and
months after the disaster, rather than provide comprehensive insurance against asset losses or infrastructure
damages. The insurance is parametric—payouts are
based on parameterized models for each category of
insured events: tropical cyclones, excessive rainfall,
and earthquakes. For example, the payout after an
earthquake is proportional to its intensity, location,
and estimated losses. Predetermined payouts, based
on publicly observable data, obviate the need for
time-consuming and costly damage assessments and
insurance adjustments. A downside of parametric
insurance in response to the effects of basis risk;
that is, calculated payouts might not match the
actual damage.5
During 2007–15, the CCRIF made 13 payouts to
eight members in the total amount of $38 million,
most of which was in response to the effects of tropical
4Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, Barbados,
Belize, Bermuda, the Cayman Islands, Dominica, Grenada,
Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and
the Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobago, and the Turks and Caicos
Islands joined at the inception; Nicaragua joined in 2015. The
CCRIF is contemplating expanding beyond the Caribbean.
5Indemnity insurance avoids this problem, but suffers from
costly assessments and adjustments.

150

cyclones. The payouts ranged from 0.1 to 0.3 percent
of GDP for the recipient country. While the payouts
do not cover all losses, they offer important support to
insured countries, including from the rapid disbursement of funds—payouts have been disbursed, at the
latest, two weeks after the insured event. In addition,
CCRIF members are given complete freedom regarding the use of the funds received.
The CCRIF has proved to be an effective risk-​
pooling mechanism. Its effectiveness is recognized by
both the insured countries, which can obtain coverage
at a lower cost than they could individually from
commercial insurers, and from the participants in the
reinsurance market.

African Risk Capacity
The African Risk Capacity (ARC) is a mutual
insurance facility whose aim is to strengthen food
security. The ARC, a Specialized Agency of the African
Union, was established in 2012 to help African Union
members insure against crop failure caused by extreme
weather events, such as droughts and floods, by pooling
climate-related risks. Initially, 18 African Union members signed the establishment agreement; since then,
membership has grown to more than 35 countries.
The ARC provides parametric insurance. When an
insured event occurs, the payout is based on models
and satellite input data to predict the extent of crop
failures and the associated costs. Using parametric
instead of indemnity insurance accelerates the payouts,
which is of particular importance to the most vulnerable populations. By pooling their risks, participating
countries reduce the cost of insurance by about half,
given that drought is very unlikely to affect the whole
country pool.
Evidence points to the benefits of the ARC, but
challenges remain. The ARC has reduced the volatility
of food consumption for the most vulnerable households. Furthermore, it has helped reduce the need
for fire sales of assets in distressed regions. However,
the risk pool is still relatively small (for example, in
comparison with the CCRIF) and could be expanded
further to better diversify the risks. In addition,
misallocation of insurance may decrease with accumulated experience.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Box 3.4. Coping with Weather Shocks: The Role of Financial Markets
Financial markets can reduce the adverse consequences of weather shocks by reallocating the costs
and risks of such shocks to those most willing and
able to bear them. Insurance products, such as weather
derivatives, can help households and firms vulnerable
to short-term fluctuations in temperature and precipitation hedge their idiosyncratic weather exposure.
Catastrophe (Cat) bonds can help disperse catastrophic
weather risk to capital markets. However, the degree
to which financial markets can mitigate the impacts
of weather shocks hinges on the level of insurance
penetration and on the capacity to correctly price
weather-related risks. This box reviews recent developments in the market for weather-related financial products and provides new evidence on the extent to which
stock markets efficiently price weather-related risks.

Figure 3.4.1. Insurance Penetration:
Non-Life Insurance Premium

Insurance

1

Recent studies highlight the important role that
insurance markets could play in facilitating economic
recovery in the aftermath of weather-related natural
disasters. A higher degree of insurance penetration
can limit the fiscal burden of natural disasters (Lloyd’s
2012) and reduce their negative macroeconomic
consequences (Von Peter, Dahlen, and Saxena 2012),
especially in countries with strong institutions (Breckner and others 2016). Parametric insurance products,
developed in the early 2000s, also hold promise for
providing protection from various weather-related risks
to households and firms in low-income countries.1
Overcoming important barriers to the provision of
traditional insurance to small farmers, these products minimize transaction costs, are easy to enforce,
and limit potential adverse selection and moral
hazard issues.
Yet, insurance penetration, as captured in non-life
insurance premiums as a percentage of GDP, remains
low, especially in developing economies (Figure 3.4.1).
And despite its advantages, the take-up of parametric
insurance has been disappointing (Hallegatte and
The author of the box is Alan Xiaochen Feng.
1Unlike traditional indemnity insurance for natural hazards,
parametric insurance products offer payments that are based on a
publicly observable index, such as rainfall or temperature. While
their design offers numerous advantages over traditional products, parametric insurance can leave a fair amount of residual
risk uncovered (“basis risk”), given that the actual loss may differ
from the payment received by contract holders.

(Percent of GDP)
6

North America
Western Europe

Japan
Africa

5

4

Latin America and the Caribbean
Eastern Europe
South and East Asia

3

2

0
1980

85

90

95

2000

05

10

14

Sources: Haver Analytics; Swiss Re, Sigma database; and
IMF staff calculations.

others 2016). Many factors have likely contributed to
the slow adoption of the novel financial instruments,
including limited financial literacy or experience with
similar financial products, insufficient understanding
of the product, high cost, and residual basis risk (see,
among others, Cole and others 2012, 2013; Karlan
and others 2014).

Catastrophe Bonds
The market for Cat bonds, a financial instrument
that transfers catastrophe risk from the issuing primary
insurers and reinsurance companies to the capital
markets, has grown rapidly in recent years, reaching an
outstanding volume of nearly $30 billion at the end
of 2016 (Figure 3.4.2).2 Cat bonds are attractive to
investors because they have relatively higher yields and
low correlation with the returns of most other financial assets. The low-interest-rate environment since
2Cat bonds pay interest, principal, or both during normal
times, but absorb losses if a predefined catastrophe occurs. They
were first introduced in the mid-1990s, in the aftermath of
Hurricane Andrew.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

151

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 3.4 (continued)
Figure 3.4.2. Catastrophe Bond Market
(Billions of US dollars)

Figure 3.4.3. Temperature Shocks and Stock
Price Predictability: Food and Beverages
Sector

35
Issued

30

3

Outstanding

One-year-ahead standardized return

25
20
15
10
5
0

1997 2000

03

06

09

12

15 17

Source: Artemis Insurance-Linked Securities and Catastrophe
Bond Market Report (www.artemis.bm).
Note: Years ending June 30.

the global financial crisis, as well as new regulations
that recognize the relief of capital through Cat bond
issuance, have potentially contributed to the growth
of the Cat bond market. Cat bonds have become an
increasingly popular tool for private insurance and
reinsurance companies in Europe, Japan, and the
United States to transfer away their risk exposures to
earthquakes, storms, and hurricanes.
As discussed in the chapter, low-income developing
countries and small states are especially vulnerable to
catastrophic risks. Mexico, in 2006, was the first country to issue Cat bonds; since then, several low-income
developing countries have issued Cat bonds covering
hurricanes, earthquakes, and other extreme events. The
World Bank issued its first-ever Cat bond in 2014 to
provide reinsurance to the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk
Insurance Facility, a risk-pooling facility designed to
limit the financial impact on 16 Caribbean country
governments after possible earthquakes and hurricanes (see also Box 3.3). A similar arrangement—the
Extreme Climate Facility—is being developed by
the African Risk Capacity (see Box 3.3) to allow for
the issuance of Cat bonds to alleviate the impact

152

2

y = –0.41x + 0.18
R 2 = 0.08

1

0

–1

–2
–2.0 –1.5 –1.0 –0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Temperature, annual deviation from country average

Sources: Datastream; Peng and Feng (forthcoming); and IMF
staff calculations.
Note: One-year-ahead food and beverages sector returns are
regressed on annual average temperature (deviation from the
country average, degrees Celsius). Sample is restricted to
countries with an average annual temperature above 15°C.

of extreme weather conditions on member African countries.

Do Financial Markets Correctly Price
Weather-Related Risks?
The optimal level of insurance against abnormal
weather conditions requires accurate assessments of
weather-related risk. There is growing evidence that
investors in financial markets do not fully understand,
at least immediately, the impact of weather shocks on
output and productivity. Hong, Li, and Xu (2016)
show that the stock indices of the food industry
in the United States and in a few other advanced
economies respond to changes in drought indices only
with a delay. This finding suggests that markets do
not incorporate weather information into prices until
several months later, perhaps after the losses incurred
are reflected in food companies’ annual reports. The

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Box 3.4 (continued)
initial underreaction to weather shocks may indicate
the possibility of underinsurance, even in the presence
of easily accessible insurance products.
The analysis in this box examines the response
of investors to temperature variations. As demonstrated in the chapter, an increase in temperature in
countries with relatively hot climates has a negative
effect on output and productivity, especially in
certain sectors of the economy. Using data on equity
market returns across 17 sectors in 42 countries
and annual fluctuation in temperature, the analysis
studies whether financial markets correctly price
in these adverse temperature effects. If markets are
efficient, fluctuations in temperature should have
no predictive power on equity returns because stock
prices instantaneously reflect the impact of temperature shocks on firm performance. Empirical analysis
suggests that this is not the case. Higher temperature
can predict negative future (12-month-ahead) stock
returns for the food and beverages sector, suggesting

that investors respond to temperature shocks with a
delay (Figure 3.4.3).3 These effects are particularly
strong for countries at lower latitudes (for example,
those with average annual temperature greater than
15°C) and are insignificant for industrial, technology,
utilities, and oil and gas sectors. The predictability
of stock returns in the food and beverages sector
suggests that the impact of temperature shocks on
productivity is not well priced by investors until several months later (possibly only after earnings reports
reflect these losses), consistent with the hypothesis of
underreaction to these shocks.
3The one-year-ahead equity return for the food and beverages
sector is regressed on current-year average temperature in the
country, controlling for country-year fixed effects as well as the
dividend yield of the sector. Equity returns are normalized by
the standard deviation of yearly sector returns in each country.
Results are robust to controlling for one-year-ahead average temperature in the country. Similar effects are found for retail and
personal goods sectors (Peng and Feng forthcoming).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

153

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 3.5. Historical Climate, Economic Development, and World Income Distribution
As argued in the chapter, climate change may have
very long-lived effects on economic performance,
although the exact magnitudes depend on many
factors, including economic agents’ adaptability and
the ability of the economy to structurally adjust.
Empirically, it is very difficult to disentangle whether
weather shocks have permanent level or growth effects
on output based on recent data (since 1950); if they
reflect permanent growth rather than level effects, then
the consequences may be many times larger than the
initial effects, but this impact would manifest only
over a very long time.
This box reviews a relatively new and growing literature that attempts to directly assess whether historical
climate can have a large and permanent effect on
economic performance. Enabled by the rising availability and granularity of historical data, the literature
examines the relationship between modern outcomes
and historical climate, starting from the hypothesis
that historical events (potentially in the very deep
past) interact with the physical environment and can
have permanent effects on economic development and
performance.1
Leveraging the exogeneity of historical climate,
Bluedorn, Valentinyi, and Vlassopoulos (2009)
estimate the reduced-form relationship between a
The author of this box is John C. Bluedorn.
1Nunn (2014) provides an excellent exposition of the idea,
which is central to recent empirical research on historical
development.

country’s temperature over different periods from 1730
to 2000 and its modern income per capita, uncovering
some striking patterns. A simple bivariate regression
confirms the strong negative correlation between
income in 2000 and the average temperature during
1970–99 (Table 3.5.1, regression 1). However, after
controlling for historical average temperature in the
18th and 19th centuries, a time-varying and nonmonotonic effect of temperature on current country
incomes is revealed, with 18th century temperature
exhibiting a positive and large effect while 19th century temperature shows an even larger negative effect
(Table 3.5.1, regression 2). Interestingly, once historical climate is introduced, 20th century temperature
no longer shows a strong, negative association with
current income, suggesting that it may be serving as
a proxy for the combined effects of historical climate,
rather than capturing a direct impact of the current
temperature level in the simple regression.
What might account for the estimated nonmonotonic relationship between temperature and income?
Bluedorn, Valentinyi, and Vlassopoulos (2009)
postulate that it could reflect interactions between
temperature and historical events across centuries.
For example, the large negative effect of 19th century
temperature on current incomes could be linked to
a slower diffusion of technologies from the United
Kingdom and Europe, which were at the technological
frontier then, and generally at the cooler end of the
global temperature distribution. If the technologies
these countries developed were more suitable for

Table 3.5.1. Effect of Historical Climate on Current Real Output
Mean
Temperature

Mean Temperature
R2

1970–99

1970–99

1830–59

1730–59

–2.100*
(0.315)
–2.591**
(0.484)
–1.660**
(0.262)
–2.652**
(0.461)

(2)
1.864**
(0.301)
2.353**
(0.446)
1.505**
(0.257)
2.423**
(0.453)

(1)

Sample
Full Sample
Visual Outliers Excluded
Sub-Saharan Africa
Excluded
Neo-Europes Excluded

–0.061**
(0.011)
–0.058**
(0.011)
–0.026*
(0.011)
–0.057**
(0.011)

0.16
0.15
0.04
0.14

0.177
(0.073)
0.179
(0.180)
0.126**
(0.047)
0.169*
(0.068)

R2

N

0.27

167

0.24

162

0.16

128

0.25

163

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Dependent variable is log real GDP per capita in 2000, purchasing power parity adjusted. Robust standard errors appear underneath
coefficient estimates in parentheses. Visual outliers are Australia, Bolivia, Eritrea, Ethiopia, and the United States. Neo-Europes = Australia,
Canada, New Zealand, and the United States. N = number of countries in the cross-sectional sample. See Bluedorn, Valentinyi, and
Vlassopoulos (2009).
* p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.

154

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Box 3.5 (continued)
cooler climates, the negative correlation between 19th
century temperature and current incomes could arise
from historically slower technological adoption. Alternative interpretations are possible, such as a negative
relationship between historical temperature and the
quality of institutions adopted in European colonies
in the 19th century (see Acemoglu, Johnson, and
Robinson 2001).
The positive effect of 18th century temperature on
current incomes is more difficult to interpret. Fenske
and Kala (2015) provide a compelling hypothesis for
Africa, where the level of a region’s participation in
the 18th century slave trade may have been shaped
by climate conditions. Given the adverse effects
higher temperatures have on agricultural productivity and mortality in hotter climates, as documented
in the chapter, Fenske and Kala (2015) argue that
a region’s slave supply costs fell when temperatures
were lower, leading to greater slave exports, which, in
turn, is strongly associated with poorer incomes today
(Nunn 2008).
Climate may have also affected the timing of
transitions along the economic development path.
Ashraf and Michalopoulos (2015) argue that climatic
volatility thousands of years ago affected the willingness of human societies to experiment with farming as

a solution to unpredictable foraged food sources. They
find a statistically significant and robust hump-shaped
relationship between the standard deviation of
historically experienced temperatures in a region and
the timing of the adoption of agriculture—areas with
more volatile climate (assuming that the volatility was
not so large as to precipitate social collapse) tended to
make the transition to farming earlier, partly accounting for differences in income today.
Andersen, Dalgaard, and Selaya (2016) consider
another characteristic of climate—the historical
intensity of ultraviolet radiation (UV-R) experienced
in a location. They argue that higher UV-R intensity
affects mortality and thereby the willingness to engage
in human capital investment. This, in turn, affected
the time at which a society experienced the fertility
transition (the decline of fertility associated with a rise
in incomes; see Galor 2011). A slower fertility transition is associated with lower incomes at the country
level today. In a mix of empirical and theoretical work,
they find a positive relationship between UV-R and
the transition timing, consistent with the link they
hypothesize.
As shown by these studies, historical climate can
have very long-lived effects on economic development
through its interaction with historical events.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

155

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 3.6. Mitigating Climate Change
Although the primary focus of the chapter is the
macroeconomic consequences of climate change and
potential for adaptation in low-income countries,
only a concerted global effort to cut greenhouse gas
emissions and slow the pace of rising temperatures can
limit the long-term threat of climate change. This box
reviews recent developments in climate change mitigation efforts and describes the crucial role fiscal policies
could play in abating climate change and mobilizing
financing for mitigation and adaptation, drawing on
recent IMF work.1

The 2015 Paris Agreement
In December 2015 parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change agreed
to the aspirational goal of containing global warming
to 2°C above preindustrial levels (and to strive to keep
warming to 1.5°C), thus laying the foundation for
meaningful progress on addressing climate change at the
global level. Mitigation pledges were submitted by 195
countries in their Nationally Determined Contributions
(NDCs) under the 2015 Paris Agreement, with many
pledges aiming to reduce emissions in 2030 by about
30 percent relative to emissions in some baseline year.
Starting in 2018 parties are required to report progress
on meeting mitigation pledges every two years, and to
submit updated (and preferably more stringent) NDCs
every five years. The pledges are not legally binding, however, and there is some risk of backtracking, given that
the United States is withdrawing from the agreement.
The Paris Agreement strengthens previous commitments by developed economies to jointly mobilize $100 billion a year by 2020 for adaptation and
mitigation in developing economies. By 2025 the
parties to the agreement are expected to set a new
collective quantifiable goal from a floor of $100 billion
a year—many developing countries’ more ambitious
mitigation commitments are contingent on receiving
external finance.

The Role of Fiscal Instruments in Climate
Change Mitigation
It is widely accepted that carbon pricing—charging
for the carbon emissions from fossil fuels—should be
The author of this box is Ian Parry.
1See, for example, Chapter 4 of the October 2008 World
Economic Outlook; Parry, de Mooij, and Keen (2012); Parry,
Morris, and Williams (2015); Farid and others (2016); and Parry
and others (2016).

156

front and center in implementing mitigation pledges
in both advanced and emerging market economies.
Charging for carbon emissions increases the price of
energy from fossil fuels (especially carbon-intensive
coal) and provides incentives for mitigation, including
replacing coal with less-carbon-intensive natural gas
as well as carbon-free renewables and nuclear energy.
In addition, carbon pricing stimulates improvements in energy efficiency, reduces the demand for
energy-consuming products, and promotes innovation
(for example, in the areas of carbon capture and storage technologies).
Carbon pricing can be implemented through
carbon taxes or emissions trading systems. Carbon
taxes are imposed on fossil fuels in proportion to the
fuel’s carbon content. Implementing carbon taxes is a
straightforward extension of already-established taxes
on fossil fuels and can be easily administered in most
countries. Emissions trading systems put an upper
limit on emissions by issuing emissions allowances.
Firms are required to obtain allowances to cover
their emissions, and the trading of allowances among
emitters establishes the price of emissions. Emissions
trading systems are typically implemented downstream
on power generators and large industrial firms and
need to be accompanied by other measures to cover
smaller sources of emissions, for example, from vehicles and buildings.

China
China, the largest emitter of carbon dioxide
(CO2), accounted for 29 percent of global emissions
in 2013. According to IMF estimates, phasing in
an emissions tax of $70 a ton of CO2 in China by
2030 would raise the prices of coal, electricity, and
road fuels by about 70 percent, 15 percent, and
7 percent, respectively, and reduce 2030 emissions
by about 30 percent, relative to the no-tax scenario
(Figure 3.6.1, panel 1). An alternative with almost
equal effectiveness would simply involve the addition
of a carbon charge to existing taxes on domestic and
imported coal. An emissions trading system would
be about 40 percent less effective than a carbon tax.
Given that China is moving ahead with an emissions
trading system in any case, combining it with an
up-front coal charge (perhaps with rebates for entities
covered by the emissions trading system) would
ensure more comprehensive pricing. Despite being
less effective than carbon taxes, an emissions trading

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Box 3.6 (continued)
system is nonetheless much more effective than a
variety of other mitigation policies, such as incentives
for energy efficiency or renewables and taxes on road
fuels and electricity.
Coal and carbon taxes, if phased in between 2017
and 2030, would also substantially reduce air pollution
in China and save almost 4 million lives. The emissions trading system is about half as effective in this
regard, with about 2 million lives saved (Figure 3.6.1,
panel 2). The carbon tax would also raise substantial
revenues of about 3 percent of GDP in 2030. In other
countries, typically less coal intensive than China,
reduced CO2 emissions, lower domestic air pollution,
and increased fiscal revenues would be less striking (in
proportionate terms). However, the key policy lessons
would remain unchanged: carbon taxes are the most
effective mitigation instrument. Furthermore, carbon
taxes—because of their domestic environmental and
fiscal benefits—can be (up to a point) in countries’
own interests.

Easing the Transition to Carbon Pricing
At the domestic level, undesirable effects of carbon
pricing need to be mitigated to ease its adoption.
Some carbon-intensive industries might become
uneconomical as a result of carbon pricing, and
their employees will require help with retraining and
re­allocation to other sectors. Using a fraction of revenues from carbon pricing to enhance social safety nets
and to offer other forms of fiscal relief to low-income
households would smooth the transition as well.2
At the international level, policymakers might
consider imposing carbon price floor requirements for
large emitters to reinforce the Paris Agreement and
provide some reassurance against losses in competitiveness. Countries could elect to set carbon prices above
the floor for fiscal or domestic environmental reasons,
thus becoming environmental leaders—a prototype
for this type of arrangement is the recently announced
requirement that Canadian provinces phase in a price
of Can$50 a ton of CO2 by 2022.

Progress on Climate Mitigation
Carbon pricing mechanisms have proliferated—
about 40 national governments and more than 20
2For example, Parry and others (2016) and Parry, Mylonas,
and Vernon (2017) show that, at least initially, this assistance will
require about 10 percent or less of the carbon pricing revenues.

Figure 3.6.1. Effectiveness of Mitigation
Policies in China
1. CO 2 Reduction in 2030 below Business as Usual
(Percent)
Energy efﬁciency: buildings/industry
Energy efﬁciency: vehicles
Road fuel tax
Energy efﬁciency: electricity
Reducing CO2 intensity: power
Renewable subsidy
Electricity excise
Emissions trading system
Coal excise
Carbon tax
0

10

20

30

4 2. Reduction in Air Pollution Deaths
(Millions)
3
2

Emissions trading system
Difference between coal excise
and emissions trading system
Difference between carbon
tax and coal excise

1
0
2015

20

25

30

Source: Parry and others (2016).
Note: The price is $70 per ton of CO2 for emissions trading
system, coal excise, and carbon tax. CO2 = carbon dioxide.

subnational governments have implemented, or are
implementing, some form of carbon pricing. Much
more remains to be done, however. Only 12 percent of global greenhouse gases are currently priced
(although China’s emissions trading system will
double this figure). Current prices are also too low.
CO2 prices for emissions trading systems are less
than $15 a ton of CO2, and carbon taxes are mostly
less than $25 a ton, with the notable exceptions of
Canada and the Scandinavian countries (World Bank,
Ecofys, and Vivid Economics 2016). In contrast,
average global prices of about $40–$80 a ton by 2020
would be consistent with limiting projected warming
to 2°C (Stern and Stiglitz 2017). This shortfall in
appropriate pricing could result in large-scale future
climate change and underscores the pressing need for
adaptation investment.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

157

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 3.6 (continued)
The Role of Fiscal Instruments in Climate Finance
Financing needs for climate adaptation investment
in developing economies have been estimated at
upward of $80 billion a year until 2050 (Margulis and
Narain 2010), which greatly exceeds current finance
from advanced economies. The volume of public and
private climate finance mobilized by developed economies for developing economies reached $62 billion in
2014 (of which only 15 percent was for adaptation),
compared with the $100 billion goal set in 2009 and
reiterated in the Paris Agreement (OECD 2015b).
On equity grounds, there is some appeal in linking
climate finance donations from advanced economies to
their contribution to climate change. If the Group of
Twenty economies, excluding the five members with
lowest per capita income, donated $5 for each ton

158

of projected CO2 emissions, an additional $70 billion for climate finance could be raised in 2020.3
Funding these contributions from national budgets
would provide a more robust source of finance than
apportioning a fraction of revenues from future (and
highly uncertain) carbon pricing. The onus, however,
is on recipient countries to carefully cost and prioritize
adaption projects and to attract finance through resilient macro-fiscal frameworks and strong governance.
3IMF staff calculations, assuming emissions are reduced
linearly over time to meet countries’ Paris Agreement mitigation
pledges. Carbon charges for international aviation and maritime
fuels are another promising source of climate finance—a $30 a
ton CO2 charge on these fuels could raise revenues of $25 billion
in 2020, even with full compensation for developing economies
(Farid and others 2016).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Annex 3.1. Data Sources and Country Groupings
Data Sources
The primary data sources for this chapter are the
IMF World Economic Outlook database and the World
Bank World Development Indicators database. The
main data sources on temperature and precipitation are
the University of East Anglia’s Climate Research Unit
(historical data, 1901–2015) and National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA) Earth Exchange
Global Daily Downscaled Projections data set (forecast,
present–2100). All data sources used in the chapter’s
analysis are listed in Annex Table 3.1.1.

For real GDP per capita, investment, and imports,
the sources are listed in the order in which they are
spliced (which entails extending the level of a primary
series using the growth rate of a secondary series).

Data Definitions
The main historical temperature and precipitation
series used in the chapter’s analysis are constructed by
aggregating grid cell data at 0.5 × 0.5 degree resolution (approximately 56 kilometers × 56 kilometers
at the equator) to the level of individual countries or
subnational regions at annual or monthly frequency.

Annex Table 3.1.1. Data Sources
Indicator
Temperature, Historical

Temperature and Precipitation,
Forecast (Grid level)
Temperature and Precipitation,
Historical (Grid level)
Population 2010, 1990, 1950
(Grid level)
Population 2015 and Projected Population
2100
CO2 Emissions
Temperature Forcings
Natural Disasters
Global Ocean Temperature
Migration
Real GDP per Capita
Subnational GDP per Capita
Crop Production Index
Sectoral Real Value Added
(Agriculture, manufacturing, services)
Sectoral Labor Productivity
Real Gross Capital Formation
Real Imports of Goods and Services
Infant Mortality Rate
Human Development Index
Consumer Price Index
Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Reserves Minus Gold
Net Official Development Assistance
and Official Aid Received
Personal Remittances Received
Exchange Rate Regime Indicator
Adaptation Readiness and Capacity
Domestic Financial Sector Liberalization Index
Quinn-Toyoda Capital Control Index
Human Capital Index
Paved Roads Kilometers per Capita
Revised Combined Polity Score (Polity2)
Gini Coefficient
Source: IMF staff compilation.

Source
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase Five AR5
Atlas subset; Marcott and others (2013); Matsuura and Willmott (2007); National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS); Royal Netherlands Meteorological
Institute (KNMI) Climate Change Atlas; Shakun and others (2012)
NASA Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled Projections data set (NEX-GDDP)
University of East Anglia, Climate Research Unit (CRU TS v.3.24); University of Delaware (UDEL v.4.01)
Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN v.3 and v.4); History Database of the
Global Environment (HYDE v3.2); Klein and others (2016)
United Nations World Population Prospects database, 2015 Revision
Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center
Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center; NASA GISS; Roston and Migliozzi (2015)
Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters, International Disaster Database (EM-DAT)
NOAA (2017a)
Global Bilateral Migration Database, World Bank Group; Özden and others (2011)
IMF, World Economic Outlook database; World Bank, World Development Indicators database
Gennaioli and others (2014)
Food and Agriculture Organization; World Bank, World Development Indicators database
World Bank, World Development Indicators database
Groningen Growth and Development Centre 10-Sector Database; Timmer, de Vries, and de Vries (2015)
IMF, World Economic Outlook database; World Bank, World Development Indicators database
IMF, World Economic Outlook database; World Bank, World Development Indicators database
World Bank, World Development Indicators database
United Nations Development Programme, Human Development Report database
IMF, World Economic Outlook database
IMF, Historical Public Debt database
Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2017); External Wealth of Nations database, updated to 2015
World Bank, World Development Indicators database
World Bank, World Development Indicators database
Reinhart and Rogoff (2004); Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2008), updated to 2015
Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative; Chen and others (2015)
Abiad, Detragiache, and Tressel (2008)
Quinn (1997); Quinn and Toyoda (2008)
Penn World Tables 9.0
Calderón, Moral-Benito, and Servén (2015); World Bank, World Development Indicators database; Chapter 3
of the October 2014 World Economic Outlook
Polity IV Project
Standardized World Income Inequality Database

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

159

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

The estimates are weighted by grid-level population
(exploring three alternatives: population distribution as of 1950, 1990, and 2010) to account for
differences in population density (Dell, Jones, and
Olken 2014).
Temperature and precipitation projections are
from two of the four scenarios, called Representative
Concentration Pathways (RCP), constructed by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. The
RCP 4.5 scenario assumes increased attention to the
environment with slow growth of carbon dioxide
(CO2) emissions until 2050 and a decline of emissions
thereafter, resulting in a mean temperature increase
of 1.8°C by 2081–2100 relative to 1986–2005 (in a

range of 1.1°C–2.6°C, with a greater than 50 percent
chance of an increase exceeding 2°C by 2100). In the
RCP 8.5 scenario, CO2 emissions continue to grow
unconstrained, and the average 2081–2100 temperature is expected to be 3.7°C higher (in a range of
2.6°C–4.8°C) relative to 1986–2005. The chapter uses
the average of the maximum and minimum daily temperature and total daily precipitation data from 2005
and projections for 2050 and 2100 at the 0.25 x 0.25
degree resolution, averaged across the 21 models of the
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 for
each scenario. Annual temperatures are computed as
the average of the daily temperature; annual precipitation is the sum of daily precipitation.

Country Groupings
Annex Table 3.1.2. Country and Territory Groups
Advanced
Economies

Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong SAR,*
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Macao SAR,* Malta, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Portugal, Puerto Rico, San Marino,* Singapore, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan Province of China,*
United Kingdom, United States

Emerging Market
Economies

Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, The Bahamas,* Bahrain, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Fiji, Gabon, Georgia, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kosovo,* Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Macedonia FYR, Malaysia, Maldives,* Marshall
Islands,* Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia,* Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Nauru,* Oman, Pakistan, Palau,* Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Seychelles,* South Africa, Sri Lanka, St. Kitts and Nevis, St.
Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Swaziland, Syria, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,* Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela

Low-Income
Developing
Countries

Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Republic of Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, The Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Haiti, Honduras, Kenya, Kiribati,* Kyrgyz Republic, Lao P.D.R., Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Moldova, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia,*
South Sudan, Sudan, São Tomé and Príncipe, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, Uzbekistan, Vietnam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

Countries and
Territories with
Average Annual
Temperature
above 15°C

Algeria, American Samoa, Angola, Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Colombia,
Comoros, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Republic of Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Curaçao,* Cyprus, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, The Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guadeloupe,*
Guatemala, French Guiana,* Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lao P.D.R., Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Martinique,* Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Montserrat,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, New Caledonia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Philippines, Puerto Rico, Qatar, Reunion,* Rwanda, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syria, São Tomé and Príncipe, Tanzania, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Turks and Caicos,*
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, Virgin Islands (US), West Bank and Gaza, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

Countries with
Province-Level
Data

Albania, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
China, Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Korea, Kyrgyz Republic, Latvia, Lesotho,
Lithuania, Macedonia FYR, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Tanzania, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Vietnam

Countries with
Argentina, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Egypt, Ethiopia, France, Germany, Ghana, Hong Kong SAR,*
Sectoral-Level
India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Korea, Malawi, Malaysia, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Netherlands, Nigeria, Peru, Philippines, Senegal,
Data
Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Taiwan Province of China,* Tanzania, Thailand, United Kingdom, United States, Venezuela, Zambia
Source: IMF staff compilation.
* Not included in the main regression analysis.

160

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Annex 3.2. Weather Shocks and
Natural Disasters
Although there is a clear link between weather conditions and the occurrence of extreme weather events,
the relationship between weather shocks and natural
disasters—extreme events associated with significant
economic damage and loss of life—has not been studied in detail. The analysis in this section examines how
weather conditions influence the frequency of various
types of weather-related natural disasters.
A logit panel specification with country fixed effects
is used to estimate the effect of the weather variables ​​
c​ i,t​​​ (temperature and precipitation) on the probability of a natural disaster taking place in country i in a
given month t.
​​Pr​(​​ ​disaster​  i,t​​  = 1​)​​​​ = Φ (​​β​  1​​ ​c​ i,t​​​ + ​​β​  2​​ ​c​ i,t2 ​​​  + ​​γ​  1​​ ​Dev​ i,tT ​​​ 
​  ​​+ ​​​δ​  1​​  ln​(​​GDP​)​​​  i,t − 12​​​
+ ​​​γ​  2​​  Dev​ i,tP ​​​  + ​​​γ​  3​​  Dev​ i,tOcean
+ ​​δ​  2​​ ​ln​(​​Pop​)​​​  i,t − 12​​​+ ​​µ​  i​​​ + ​​ε​  i,t​​​),

(3.1)

in which the nonlinear function Φ(·) = exp(·)/
(1+exp(·)) captures the effect of the regressors on the
probability of a natural disaster. Country fixed effects
(​​µ​ i​​​) capture time-invariant country characteristics,
such as the size and geographic location of the country
and its topology, that may influence the exposure and
vulnerability of countries to different types of disasters.51 The specification controls for the level of real
GDP per capita and population, as well as for global
weather conditions—specifically the deviation in
global ocean surface temperature from the 1901–2000
average—that might affect the incidence of disasters.
The sample includes monthly data during 1990–2014
for 228 countries and territories on more than 8,000
weather-related disasters. Equation (3.1) is estimated
separately for each type of natural disaster, improving on Thomas and Lopez (2015), who perform a
similar exercise on annual data, but group together
all disasters.
Annex Table 3.2.1 presents the estimation results
for each disaster type. Weather conditions have a
51Given the large time dimension of the sample (each country
has about 300 observations), a panel logit specification is preferred
to conditional logit models because it allows for the estimation of
predicted and marginal effects accounting for country fixed effects.
The results are robust to the use of conditional logit regression
models developed by Chamberlain (1980) to avoid the incidental
parameters problem that may arise from estimating fixed effects with
a small time sample.

very strong impact on the occurrence of disasters.
More precipitation reduces the occurrence of disasters caused by droughts, wildfires, and heat waves,
but increases the probability of disasters triggered by
floods, landslides, cold waves, tropical cyclones, and
other storms. The effects of temperature are also as
expected, with higher temperatures resulting in more
disasters caused by droughts, wildfires, heat waves,
tropical cyclones, and other storms, but reducing the
probability of cold waves. The results also show that
precipitation has nonlinear effects on the probability
of most disasters.
Interestingly, the estimations suggest that the
weather conditions over the preceding 12 months
have a significant effect on the occurrence of most
types of disasters. Weather anomalies during the
previous year, as captured in the cumulative deviation
of temperature and precipitation from its monthly
10-year average, are important determinants of all
types of disasters, except those caused by landslides
or tropical cyclones, which are entirely a function of
short-term weather patterns. Epidemics, however, are
not affected by short-term weather conditions, but
respond to temperature deviations in the year before
the event is triggered.
To quantify the likely impact of climate change, the
analysis combines the estimation results and projected
temperature and precipitation in 2050 and 2100 under
Representative Concentration Pathway 8.5 to predict
the likelihood of each type of natural disaster. These
predicted probabilities in 2050 and 2100 are compared
with the predicted incidence of natural disasters over
2010–14 in Figure 3.6.

Annex 3.3. Empirical Analysis of the
Macroeconomic Effects of Weather Shocks and
the Role of Policies
This annex provides further details on the empirical model used to quantify short- and medium-term
effects of weather on economic activity to identify
the channels through which these effects occur,
investigate evidence or lack thereof of adaptation over time, and study the role of various
policy measures in attenuating the effects of temperature shocks.
The baseline analysis uses Jordà’s (2005) local
projection method to trace out the impulse response
functions of various outcomes to weather shocks based
on the following equation:
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

161

162
(1)
–0.002***
(0.001)
0.000***
(0.000)
0.024*
(0.013)
–0.000
(0.000)
–0.005***
(0.001)
0.037*
(0.019)
–0.127
(1.002)
–0.975*
(0.500)
0.869
(0.878)
10.481*
(6.145)

(2)
0.000
(0.001)
0.000
(0.000)
0.009
(0.012)
0.000
(0.000)
–0.000
(0.000)
0.024**
(0.012)
1.014**
(0.486)
–0.589**
(0.267)
2.361***
(0.364)
5.529*
(3.087)

Epidemic
(3)
0.022***
(0.002)
–0.000***
(0.000)
0.051***
(0.020)
–0.001
(0.001)
0.001***
(0.000)
–0.008
(0.006)
0.274
(0.298)
–0.059
(0.158)
2.575***
(0.318)
1.646
(1.896)

Flood
(4)
0.018***
(0.003)
–0.000***
(0.000)
–0.010
(0.025)
–0.000
(0.001)
0.001
(0.000)
–0.013
(0.013)
0.028
(0.578)
0.033
(0.383)
0.650
(0.662)
–5.050
(4.746)

Landslide
(5)
–0.023***
(0.004)
0.000***
(0.000)
0.109***
(0.012)
0.001
(0.001)
–0.001*
(0.001)
0.022
(0.020)
1.566*
(0.870)
–1.029
(0.711)
0.821
(1.211)
9.982
(8.525)

Wildfire
(6)
0.014***
(0.005)
–0.000**
(0.000)
–0.286***
(0.049)
–0.007***
(0.002)
–0.001*
(0.000)
–0.042***
(0.015)
1.098
(0.781)
2.486***
(0.627)
–1.026
(1.392)
–31.876***
(7.772)

Cold Wave
(7)
–0.009***
(0.003)
0.000***
(0.000)
0.282*
(0.144)
0.005
(0.005)
–0.003***
(0.001)
0.026
(0.019)
0.861
(1.025)
0.045
(0.382)
0.273
(1.267)
–9.242**
(4.416)

Heat Wave

(8)
0.012***
(0.003)
–0.000*
(0.000)
0.168***
(0.039)
–0.001
(0.001)
0.000
(0.000)
0.003
(0.009)
–1.441***
(0.549)
–0.076
(0.302)
2.617***
(0.582)
0.504
(3.683)

Tropical
Cyclone

(9)
0.012***
(0.004)
–0.000**
(0.000)
–0.063***
(0.014)
0.000
(0.001)
0.000
(0.000)
0.033***
(0.007)
0.395
(0.370)
–0.303
(0.279)
0.058
(0.575)
3.519
(3.352)

Other Storms

Number of Observations
29,976
35,772
43,632
19,620
18,732
17,844
12,924
20,652
33,684
Number of Countries
101
120
147
66
63
61
44
69
114
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The dependent variable is an indicator that takes the value of 1 if a natural disaster of a particular type is taking place. All specifications control for country fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the country level.
* p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.

Constant

Log Populationt – 12

Log GDP per Capitat – 12

Global Ocean Temperature Deviations

Temperature Deviations (12 months)

Precipitation Deviations (12 months)

Temperature2

Temperature

Precipitation2

Dependent Variable
Precipitation

Drought

Annex Table 3.2.1. Effect of Weather Shocks on Natural Disasters, 1990–2014

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

yi,t + h − yi,t – 1 = ​​β​  h1​ ​ ​c​ i,t​​​ + ​​β​  h2​ ​ ​c​ i,t2 ​​​  + ​​γ​  h1​ ​ ​c​ i,t − 1​​​ + ​​γ​  h2​ ​ ​c​ i,t2 ​​
− 1​
+ ​​∑ jh=−11​ ​​ ​δ​  h1​ ​ ​c​ i,t + h − j​​​ + ​​∑ jh=−11​ ​​ ​δ​  h2​ ​ ​c​ i,t2 ​​
+ h − j​
​​ yi,t – 1 + ​​µ​  hi​  ​​ + ​​θ​  hr,t ​​​  + ​​ε​  hi,t ​​,​ 
+ ​​φ​  h1​ Δ

(3.2)

in which i indexes countries, t indexes years, and h
indexes the estimation horizon (from horizon 0, which
represents the contemporaneous regression, up to
horizon 7). Regressions for each horizon are estimated
separately. The dependent variable is the cumulative growth rate of the outcome of interest between
horizons t − 1 and t + h, measured as difference in
the natural logarithms (yi,t). Following Burke, Hsiang,
and Miguel (2015a), the estimated regression has a
quadratic specification in the weather variables ci,t ,
which comprise average annual temperature (T) and
precipitation (P). The regressions control for one lag of
the dependent and weather variables and for forwards
of the weather variables, as suggested by Teulings and
Zubanov (2014). Country fixed effects (​​µ​ ih​  ​​) control for
all time-invariant country differences, such as latitude, initial macroeconomic conditions, and average
growth rates, while time fixed effects interacted with
region dummies (​​θ​  hr,t ​​​ ) control for the common effect
of all annual shocks across countries within a region.
The analysis also explores an alternative fixed-effects
structure proposed by Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel
(2015a), which includes time fixed effects (​​τ​  hi​  ​​) and
country-specific linear and quadratic time trends (​​θ​  hi​  ​  t​ +​​
θ​  hi​  ​ ​t​​  2​​) to account for within-country changes over time,
such as demographic shifts, instead of the region-year
fixed effects (​​θ​  hr,t ​​​ ) of the baseline specification. Standard
errors are clustered at the country level. To avoid bias
associated with “bad controls” (or overcontrolling), the
specification is purposefully parsimonious: many of the
determinants of growth, typically included in standard
growth regressions (for example, institutional quality,
educational achievement, policies, and so forth), may
themselves be shaped by weather shocks, as documented
below, and are thus not part of the baseline estimation.
Within this estimation framework, the effect of a
1°C increase in temperature on the level of output at
horizon h can be obtained by differentiating equation
(3.2) with respect to temperature:
​∂ ​(​​y​ 

​​  − ​y​ 
∂ ​Ti,t
​  ​​

​​​)​​

i,t + h
i,t − 1
​​  ___________
  
 ​ = ​
β​  h1​ ​ + 2 ​β​  h2​ ​ ​Ti,t
​  ​​​ .

(3.3)

Evaluating equation (3.3) for each horizon separately
and using the 2015 annual average temperature ​​T​ i,2015​​​
allows us to obtain the impulse response functions of
per capita GDP to a temperature shock for each coun-

try. The marginal effect of an increase in precipitation
is computed analogously. The threshold temperature
at which the effect on the outcome variable switches
from positive to negative can be obtained by setting
equation (3.3) to zero.

The Effect of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity
Annex Table 3.3.1 presents the key results for the
effect of weather shocks on per capita output, along
with numerous robustness checks. Panel A contains the
estimated coefficients for the weather variables at horizon 0 (that is, the contemporaneous effects of weather
shocks); panel B shows the effect of a 1°C increase in
temperature estimated at the median 2015 temperature
for advanced economies (median T = 11°C), emerging
market economies (median T = 22°C), and low-income
developing countries (median T = 25°C) on impact and
after seven years. Similarly, panel C shows the effect of
a 100 millimeter increase in precipitation estimated at
the median 2015 precipitation for advanced economies,
emerging market economies, and low-income developing countries on impact and after seven years.
Annex Table 3.3.1 begins by replicating Burke, Hsiang,
and Miguel’s (2015a) specification and establishes its
robustness to using alternative sources of weather data;
alternative population weights that are used to aggregate
gridded weather data at the country level; alternative sets
of fixed effects; and alternative samples, controls, and
estimation approaches. Column (1) estimates the specification used in Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015a) and
includes country-specific linear and quadratic time trends,
University of Delaware weather data, and 1990 population weights in the chapter’s substantially larger sample
(the chapter expands the sample both geographically and
temporally by about 25 percent). Column (2) uses an
alternative source of weather data, the University of East
Anglia Climate Research Unit instead of the University of
Delaware, and obtains similar coefficients on the temperature and precipitation variables.
The choice of population weights used to aggregate
gridded weather data to the country level could play an
important role given that migration within and across
country borders is one of the potential strategies for coping with adverse weather conditions. Given that historical data show an increase in average annual temperatures
starting in the 1970s (Figure 3.3), column (3) presents
results with 1950 population weights to account for
migration responses that could have already taken place.
Following Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012), column
(4) and column (5) (main specification for the chapter)
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

163

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Annex Table 3.3.1. Effect of Weather Shocks on Output
(2)
1.443***
(0.367)
–0.049***
(0.011)
0.103*
(0.061)
–0.002**
(0.001)

(3)
1.428***
(0.366)
–0.048***
(0.011)
0.163*
(0.085)
–0.004**
(0.002)

(4)
1.343***
(0.355)
–0.052***
(0.011)
0.045
(0.058)
–0.001
(0.001)

(5)
1.347***
(0.357)
–0.051***
(0.011)
0.110
(0.104)
–0.003
(0.002)

(6)
1.248***
(0.339)
–0.044***
(0.010)
0.127
(0.103)
–0.003
(0.002)

(7)
1.342***
(0.355)
–0.051***
(0.011)
0.119
(0.104)
–0.003
(0.002)
–0.406**
(0.180)

(8)
1.249***
(0.380)
–0.044***
(0.011)
0.082
(0.112)
–0.002
(0.002)

15
CRU
2010
Y
N
Y
N
0.15
198
9,114

15
CRU
1950
Y
N
Y
N
0.15
189
8,815

13
CRU
2010
N
Y
N
N
0.14
198
9,114

13
CRU
1950
N
Y
N
N
0.14
189
8,815

14
CRU
1950
N
Y
N
Y
0.14
184
8,756

13
CRU
1950
N
Y
N
N
0.14
189
8,815

14
CRU
1950
N
Y
N
N
0.11
189
8,917

B. Impact of a 1°C Increase in Temperature on Real Output per Capita Level at Horizon 0
AE (T=11°C)
0.331*
0.370*
0.365*
0.197
0.218
(0.196)
(0.196)
(0.195)
(0.191)
(0.196)
EM (T=22°C)
–0.736**
–0.703*** –0.697*** –0.949*** –0.911***
(0.309)
(0.223)
(0.223)
(0.266)
(0.264)
LIDC (T=25°C)
–1.027***
–0.996*** –0.987*** –1.261*** –1.219***
(0.370)
(0.268)
(0.267)
(0.318)
(0.315)

0.280
(0.190)
–0.687***
(0.228)
–0.951***
(0.270)

0.217
(0.195)
–0.907***
(0.263)
–1.214***
(0.313)

0.277
(0.212)
–0.695***
(0.243)
–0.960***
(0.287)

Impact of a 1°C Increase in Temperature on Real Output per Capita Level at Horizon 7
AE (T=11°C)
0.898
0.889
0.822
0.457
0.558
(0.705)
(0.701)
(0.697)
(0.744)
(0.752)
EM (T=22°C)
–1.173
–0.957
–1.048
–1.117*
–1.115*
(0.852)
(0.665)
(0.651)
(0.604)
(0.591)
LIDC (T=25°C)
–1.738*
–1.461*
–1.558**
–1.547**
–1.571**
(1.002)
(0.761)
(0.745)
(0.686)
(0.667)

0.560
(0.744)
–1.088*
(0.595)
–1.537**
(0.670)

0.552
(0.751)
–1.138*
(0.589)
–1.599**
(0.664)

0.023
(0.478)
–0.547
(0.386)
–0.702
(0.450)

0.073
(0.071)
0.067
(0.067)
0.056
(0.059)

0.050
(0.077)
0.046
(0.072)
0.038
(0.064)

A. Real Output per Capita Growth
(1)
Temperature
1.399***
(0.359)
Temperature2
–0.049***
(0.012)
Precipitation
0.056
(0.097)
Precipitation2
–0.002
(0.002)
Any Disaster
Threshold Temperature (°C)
Weather Source
Population Weight
Year Fixed Effects
Region x Year Fixed Effects
Country Time Trends
At Least 20 Years of Data
Adjusted R 2
Number of Countries
Number of Observations

14
UDEL
2010
Y
N
Y
N
0.15
177
8,147

(9)
–1.154***
(0.320)

0.005
(0.034)

CRU
1950
N
Y
N
N
0.09
127
6,135

C. Impact of a 100 mm per Year Increase in Precipitation on Real Output per Capita Level at Horizon 0
AE (P=800 mm per year)
EM (P=900 mm per year)
LIDC (P=1,100 mm per year)

0.018
(0.067)
0.013
(0.063)
0.004
(0.057)

0.066
(0.046)
0.061
(0.045)
0.052
(0.041)

0.101*
(0.059)
0.093*
(0.056)
0.078
(0.050)

0.028
(0.046)
0.026
(0.045)
0.022
(0.042)

0.066
(0.071)
0.060
(0.067)
0.049
(0.059)

0.076
(0.070)
0.070
(0.066)
0.057
(0.058)

Impact of a 100 mm per Year Increase in Precipitation on Real Output per Capita Level at Horizon 7
AE (P=800 mm per year)
0.304
0.171
0.179
–0.173
–0.187
–0.207
–0.209
–0.287
(0.198)
(0.216)
(0.227)
(0.214)
(0.223)
(0.225)
(0.224)
(0.229)
EM (P=900 mm per year)
0.295
0.166
0.174
–0.156
–0.166
–0.187
–0.188
–0.267
(0.188)
(0.205)
(0.215)
(0.200)
(0.209)
(0.210)
(0.210)
(0.216)
LIDC (P=1,100 mm per year)
0.278
0.155
0.164
–0.121
–0.126
–0.148
–0.146
–0.227
(0.169)
(0.185)
(0.192)
(0.174)
(0.182)
(0.182)
(0.183)
(0.191)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The table presents results from estimating equation (3.2), with separate regressions for each horizon. Panel A reports the estimated coefficients on the weather variables for horizon 0. Panels B and C show the marginal impact of a change in temperature and precipitation computed as per equation (3.3) at the median temperature (T) and median precipitation
(P) of advanced economies (AE), emerging markets (EM), and low-income developing countries (LIDC) contemporaneously (horizon 0) and cumulatively seven years after the shock.
The specifications in columns (1)–(8) control for country fixed effects; lags and forwards of temperature, precipitation, and their squared terms; and lag of growth. Column (8) shows
results from estimating an autoregressive distributed lag model with seven lags of the weather variables and their squared terms. Column (9) reports the coefficients on temperature and
precipitation from a linear specification estimated on a sample of countries with average temperature above 15°C, also including controls for country fixed effects and lag of growth. In
all specifications, standard errors are clustered at the country level. CRU = University of East Anglia, Climate Research Unit; mm = millimeter; UDEL = University of Delaware.
* p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.

164

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Annex Figure 3.3.1. Effect of Temperature Increase on Real per Capita Output across the Globe, with Countries Rescaled
in Proportion to Their Projected Population as of 2100
(Percent)

0.80 to 1.63
0.43 to 0.80
0.33 to 0.43
–0.50 to –0.32
–0.97 to –0.50
–1.30 to –0.97
–1.68 to –1.30
Insigniﬁcant effect
No data
Sources: Natural Earth; ScapeToad; United Nations World Population Prospects database: the 2015 revision; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The map depicts the contemporaneous effect of a 1°C increase in temperature on per capita output computed as per equation (3.3) using recent 10-year
average country-level temperature together with estimated coefﬁcients in Annex Table 3.3.1, column (5). Each country is rescaled in proportion to the projected
population as of 2100. Using projected population as of 2100, 76 percent of world population will live in countries that experience a negative impact from 1°C
increase. Gray areas indicate the estimated impact is not statistically signiﬁcant.

present results for the baseline specification with
region-year fixed effects instead of country-specific
time trends. Column (6) limits the sample to countries
with at least 20 years of data.
Column (7) controls separately for the occurrence
of natural disasters given that temperature and precipitation fluctuations might affect economic activity through their effect on the incidence of natural
disasters, as discussed in Annex 3.2. Controlling for
natural disasters does not materially alter the estimated
coefficients on temperature and precipitation.52
In columns (1)–(7), impulse responses were estimated
using Jordà’s (2005) local projection method. This
approach is advocated by Stock and Watson (2007),
among others, as a flexible alternative that does not
impose the dynamic restrictions embedded in vector
autoregressions (autoregressive distributed lag) specifications and is particularly suited to estimating nonlinearities
52To further explore the robustness of these results, weather
variables were transformed using natural logarithms or normalized by
subtracting the country mean and dividing by the country standard
deviation. Availability of data on subnational per capita GDP and
annual average temperature and precipitation allows us to estimate
the same regression at a subnational level using province fixed effects.
Through all three specifications the main finding persists: there is a
nonlinear relationship between temperature and economic performance (results available on request).

in the dynamic response. Column (8), however, tests the
robustness of the findings to using the autodistributed lag
model with seven lags of the weather variables and their
squared terms, as in Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012), who
test different models from no lags up to 10 lags and find
that, across different lag specifications, results are broadly
consistent in magnitude and statistical significance.
Across all specifications, the estimated coefficient on
temperature is positive, and the coefficient on temperature squared is negative, confirming the nonlinear
relationship between growth and temperature shocks
uncovered by Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015a). At
low temperatures, an increase in temperature boosts
growth, whereas at high temperatures, an increase in
temperature hurts growth, with the threshold average
annual temperature estimated to be about 13°C–15°C.
As an additional robustness check, column (9) presents results of a linear regression without the squared
terms of the weather variables in which the sample is
limited to countries with average annual temperature
above 15°C. Indeed, within the sample of relatively hot
countries, the coefficient on temperature is negative
and statistically significant. The effect of temperature
increase across the globe is shown in Figure 3.8 panel
1 at grid level; in panel 2, where countries are rescaled
in proportion to their 2015 population; and in Annex
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

165

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 3.3.1, where countries are rescaled in proportion
to projected 2100 population.
There is no consistently significant relationship
between precipitation and per capita GDP growth across
the various specifications. The lack of robust relationship
could reflect potentially larger measurement error in
the precipitation variable, as discussed in Auffhammer
and others (2011), which could be further amplified by
temporal aggregation. For example, if the only channel
through which precipitation affects aggregate outcomes
is through its effect on agriculture, then only precipitation during crops’ growing period—poorly proxied by
annual precipitation—may be relevant.
Annex Table 3.3.1 also reveals the very persistent
effects of temperature shocks. The lower half of panel
B presents the cumulative effects of a 1°C increase in
temperature estimated at the median temperature of
advanced, emerging market, and low-income developing countries seven years after the shock. All but
one specification show evidence of a long-lasting and
potentially deepening adverse impact of temperature
shocks on per capita output at the temperatures experienced by the median low-income developing country.
To examine how widespread the effects of temperature may be, equation (3.2) is estimated using sectoral
value added and agricultural production as the outcomes of interest. Real value added of the agricultural,
manufacturing, and services sectors from the World
Bank’s World Development Indicators database is complemented with an index of crop production volume
compiled by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization. Results are presented in Annex
Table 3.3.2. There is a concave relationship between
temperature and output in both the agricultural and
manufacturing sectors, whereas services value added
appears to be relatively protected from the effects of
higher temperature. In other words, at the median
temperature of low-income countries, an increase in
temperature significantly reduces agricultural value
added and crop production and lowers manufacturing output.
It is important to note that, unlike aggregate output,
agricultural production is significantly affected by precipitation in addition to temperature shocks. Although
the results suggest a concave relationship between agricultural output and precipitation, at the typical levels
of precipitation of all three country groups, an increase
in precipitation unambiguously improves agricultural
productivity. The effects of precipitation are also short
lived; agricultural output seven years down the line is
166

not affected by a precipitation shock today, which is
different from the effect of temperature.

Channels
The chapter examines the potential channels through
which temperature shocks affect the macroeconomy
in a broad and long-lasting manner by studying the
relationship between temperature and each of the main
components of the aggregate production function.

Investment
As hypothesized by Fankhauser and Tol (2005),
weather shocks could have long-lasting effects on
output if they influence investment decisions, and
hence capital input. Equation (3.2) is estimated using
real gross fixed capital formation as the outcome of
interest. The analysis also examines weather’s impacts
on imports, given the tight link between imports and
investment. Results, presented in Annex Table 3.3.3,
columns (1)–(2), confirm the idea that temperature
shocks suppress investment. Although the uncertainty
surrounding the estimated contemporaneous effects
is large, seven years after a temperature increase, both
investment and imports are significantly lower in countries with relatively hot climates (see also Figure 3.10).

Labor Input
The analysis also examines whether labor supply
may be affected by temperature increases. Using infant
mortality as the outcome of interest, equation (3.2) is
estimated, uncovering a convex relationship between
temperature and current (or future) labor supply
(Annex Table 3.3.3, column [3]). In hot countries, an
increase in temperature raises infant mortality instantaneously, with the effect growing over time. In these
countries, higher temperatures also have a negative
effect on a broader measure of human well-being—the
Human Development Index, a weighted average of
per capita income, educational achievement, and life
expectancy (column [4]).

Productivity
Motivated by the body of evidence of reduced
human cognitive and physical performance at
high temperatures from laboratory experiments
and country-specific studies, the analysis examines
whether reduced labor productivity may underpin
the negative temperature–aggregate output relationship in countries with hot climates. If this is indeed

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Annex Table 3.3.2. Effect of Weather Shocks on Sectoral Output
Agriculture

Manufacturing

Services

Crop Production

(1)
0.283
(0.871)
–0.043*
(0.023)
0.705***
(0.228)
–0.015***
(0.005)

(2)
1.281
(1.035)
–0.051*
(0.027)
0.108
(0.149)
–0.002
(0.003)

(3)
–0.268
(0.585)
–0.007
(0.016)
–0.000
(0.111)
–0.001
(0.002)

(4)
3.860*
(2.085)
–0.151***
(0.050)
1.287***
(0.332)
–0.028***
(0.007)

0.10
174
5,847

0.13
168
5,225

0.12
174
5,730

0.09
185
8,836

B. Impact of a 1°C Increase in Temperature on Dependent Variable Level at Horizon 0
AE (T=11°C)
–0.664
0.152
(0.464)
(0.532)
EM (T=22°C)
–1.610***
–0.977**
(0.431)
(0.439)
LIDC (T=25°C)
–1.868***
–1.285**
(0.517)
(0.538)

–0.423
(0.303)
–0.578*
(0.298)
–0.621*
(0.362)

0.547
(1.077)
–2.767***
(0.664)
–3.671***
(0.820)

Impact of a 1°C Increase in Temperature on Dependent Variable Level at Horizon 7
AE (T=11°C)
2.070***
1.642
(0.753)
(1.798)
EM (T=22°C)
–0.498
–0.926
(0.654)
(0.939)
LIDC (T=25°C)
–1.198
–1.626
(0.769)
(1.117)

–0.220
(1.445)
0.054
(0.734)
0.129
(0.910)

1.177
(0.889)
–0.509
(0.812)
–0.969
(0.985)

–0.013
(0.075)
–0.015
(0.071)
–0.018
(0.063)

0.835***
(0.223)
0.778***
(0.210)
0.665***
(0.185)

A. Dependent Variable
Temperature
Temperature2
Precipitation
Precipitation2
Adjusted R 2
Number of Countries
Number of Observations

C. Impact of a 100 mm per Year Increase in Precipitation on Dependent Variable Level at Horizon 0
AE (P=800 mm per year)
0.458***
0.076
(0.149)
(0.105)
EM (P=900 mm per year)
0.428***
0.072
(0.139)
(0.100)
LIDC (P=1,100 mm per year)
0.366***
0.065
(0.121)
(0.090)

Impact of a 100 mm per Year Increase in Precipitation on Dependent Variable Level at Horizon 7
AE (P=800 mm per year)
–0.228
0.024
–0.141
–0.237
(0.257)
(0.390)
(0.286)
(0.284)
EM (P=900 mm per year)
–0.213
0.030
–0.125
–0.217
(0.243)
(0.371)
(0.269)
(0.267)
LIDC (P=1,100 mm per year)
–0.184
0.041
–0.094
–0.177
(0.217)
(0.332)
(0.235)
(0.235)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The table presents results from estimating equation (3.2) using the same specification as in Annex Table 3.3.1, column (5), for different dependent
variables, with separate regressions estimated for each horizon. In all specifications, standard errors are clustered at the country level. Panel A reports the
estimated coefficients on the weather variables for horizon 0. Panels B and C show the marginal impact of a change in temperature and precipitation computed as per equation (3.3) at the median temperature (T) and median precipitation (P) of advanced economies (AE), emerging markets (EM), and low-income
developing countries (LIDC) contemporaneously (horizon 0) and cumulatively seven years after the shock. mm = millimeter.
* p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.

the case, sectors where workers are more exposed
to heat should see a bigger decrease in labor productivity when temperatures rise in relatively hot
countries. The analysis uses the Groningen Growth
and Development Centre 10-sector database, which
provides sectoral real value added and employment
in 40 countries over 1950–2012, and Graff Zivin
and Neidell’s (2014) classification of sectors into

those that are “heat-exposed” and others to estimate
the following specification:53
53According to Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014), who follow
definitions from the National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health, heat-exposed industries include agriculture, forestry, fishing
and hunting, construction, mining, transportation, and utilities—
as well as manufacturing, in which facilities may not be climate
controlled in low-income countries and production processes often
generate considerable heat.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

167

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Annex Table 3.3.3. Effect of Weather Shocks on Productivity, Capital, and Labor
Capital Input

A. Dependent Variable
Temperature
Temperature2
Precipitation
Precipitation2

Adjusted R 2
Number of Countries
Number of Observations

Labor Input

Labor Productivity

Investment

Imports

Infant
Mortality

HDI

Non-Heat
Exposed

(1)
0.850
(2.042)
–0.045
(0.059)
–0.377
(0.398)
0.003
(0.009)

(2)
0.467
(0.943)
–0.068**
(0.033)
–0.654**
(0.271)
0.006
(0.007)

(3)
–0.147
(0.117)
0.005*
(0.003)
–0.001
(0.024)
0.001
(0.001)

(4)
0.269***
(0.078)
–0.008***
(0.002)
0.000
(0.018)
–0.000
(0.000)

0.246
(0.681)
–0.010
(0.018)
0.047
(0.201)
–0.003
(0.005)

0.03
169
6,093

0.08
178
6,866

0.64
182
8,685

0.31
181
3,864

Heat
Exposed
(5)
1.902*
(1.002)
–0.087***
(0.026)
0.272
(0.195)
–0.008*
(0.004)
0.03
40
17,848

B. Impact of a 1°C Increase in Temperature on Dependent Variable Level at Horizon 0
AE (T=11°C)
–0.138
–1.029**
–0.028
(0.976)
(0.455)
(0.067)
EM (T=22°C)
–1.126
–2.525***
0.092*
(1.064)
(0.753)
(0.055)
LIDC (T=25°C)
–1.395
–2.934***
0.124*
(1.331)
(0.919)
(0.063)

0.094**
(0.043)
–0.082
(0.056)
–0.129*
(0.067)

0.030
(0.396)
–0.185
(0.412)
–0.244
(0.478)

–0.003
(0.502)
–1.909***
(0.363)
–2.428***
(0.456)

Impact of a 1°C Increase in Temperature on Dependent Variable Level at Horizon 7
AE (T=11°C)
1.812
2.361
–0.364
(2.029)
(1.494)
(0.427)
EM (T=22°C)
–4.225**
–2.439*
0.569
(1.803)
(1.303)
(0.375)
LIDC (T=25°C)
–5.871***
–3.747**
0.824*
(2.074)
(1.516)
(0.426)

0.609**
(0.259)
–0.237
(0.175)
–0.467**
(0.195)

0.305
(1.183)
–0.063
(1.114)
–0.163
(1.306)

–1.142
(0.986)
–1.642
(1.119)
–1.778
(1.365)

C. Impact of a 100 mm per Year Increase in Precipitation on Dependent Variable Level at Horizon 0
AE (P=800 mm per year)
–0.329
–0.558***
0.008
–0.007
(0.262)
(0.180)
(0.015)
(0.013)
EM (P=900 mm per year)
–0.323
–0.547***
0.009
–0.008
(0.246)
(0.170)
(0.015)
(0.012)
LIDC (P=1,100 mm per year)
–0.311
–0.523***
0.011
–0.010
(0.216)
(0.151)
(0.013)
(0.011)

–0.009
(0.133)
–0.016
(0.125)
–0.030
(0.109)

0.148
(0.136)
0.132
(0.130)
0.101
(0.118)

Impact of a 100 mm per Year Increase in Precipitation on Dependent Variable Level at Horizon 7
AE (P=800 mm per year)
–0.478
–0.984**
0.071
–0.102*
–0.295
0.072
(0.689)
(0.498)
(0.163)
(0.061)
(0.832)
(0.554)
EM (P=900 mm per year)
–0.423
–0.961**
0.074
–0.097*
–0.265
0.041
(0.649)
(0.472)
(0.149)
(0.057)
(0.776)
(0.524)
LIDC (P=1,100 mm per year)
–0.313
–0.914**
0.080
–0.087*
–0.206
–0.022
(0.422)
(0.123)
(0.050)
(0.666)
(0.467)
(0.573)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Columns (1–4) present results from estimating equation (3.2) using the same specification as in Annex Table 3.3.1, column (5), for different dependent
variables. Specification in column (5) presents results from estimating equation (3.4) where an indicator for heat exposed sectors is interacted with temperature and precipitation, their squared terms, and their lags and forwards; also controlling for country-sector and region-year fixed effects, and lag of growth.
Separate regressions are estimated for each horizon. In all specifications, standard errors are clustered at the country level. Panel A reports the estimated
coefficients on the weather variables for horizon 0. Panels B and C show the marginal impact of a change in temperature and precipitation computed as per
equation (3.3) at the median temperature (T) and median precipitation (P) of advanced economies (AE), emerging markets (EM), and low-income developing
countries (LIDC), contemporaneously (horizon 0) and cumulatively seven years after the shock. HDI = Human Development Index; mm = millimeter.
* p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.

168

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

yi,s,t + h − yi,s,t − 1 = ​​β​  h1​ ​ ​c​ i,t​​​ + ​​β​  h2​ ​ ​c​ i,t2 ​​​  + ​​γ​  h1​ ​ ​c​ i,t − 1​​​
h−1 h
+ ​​γ​  h2​ ​​  c​ i,t2 ​​
− 1​ + ​​∑ j = 1​ ​​ ​δ​  1​ ​​  c​ i,t + h − j​​​
h
+ ​​∑ jh=−11​ ​​ ​δ​  h2​ ​​  c​ i,t2 ​​
+ h − j​ ​+ ​α​  1​ ​​  c​ i,t​​  × ​H​ s​​​

+ ​​α​  h2​ ​​  c​ i,t2 ​ ​​  × H​ s​​​ + ​​ω​  h1​ ​​  c​ i,t − 1​​ ​× H​ s​​​
h−1 h
+ ​​ω​  h2​ ​​  c​ i,t2 ​ ​×
− 1​ H​ s​​​ +  ​​∑ j = 1​ ​​ ​τ​  1​ ​​  c​ i,t + h − j​​ ​× H​ s​​​

+​​∑ jh=−11​ ​​ ​τ​  h2​ ​​  c​ i,t2 ​ ​×
+ h − j​ H​ s​​​
+ ​​φ​  h1​ Δ
​​ yi,s,t − 1 + ​​µ​  hi,s ​​​  + ​​θ​  hr,t ​​​  + ​​ε​  hi,s,t
 ​​,​

(3.4)

in which yi,s,t is the log of real sectoral value added
per worker, ​​H​ s​​​is an indicator for sectors that are
“heat-exposed,” ​​µ​ i,sh ​​​  are country-sector fixed effects, and ​​
θ​  hr,t ​​​  are region-year fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the country level.
Annex Table 3.3.3, specification (5) summarizes
the results of this estimation. At higher temperatures,
an increase in temperature significantly lowers labor
productivity in heat-exposed industries. Temperature
increases, however, have no discernible effect on the
productivity of workers in non-heat-exposed sectors,
even in countries with hot climates.

The Role of Policies and Institutional Settings
To study the extent to which macroeconomic and
structural policies and country characteristics mediate
the effect of weather shocks, the analysis extends the
empirical approach described above by allowing the
response of per capita output to weather shocks to vary
with various proxies for these policies. The estimated
specification augments equation (3.2) to include an
interaction term between the weather shock and the
policy variable:
yi,t + h − yi,t − 1 = ​​β​  h1​ ​​ ci,t + ​​γ​  h1​ ​​(ci,t × pi,t − 1) + ​​δ​  h1​ ​​ pi,t − 1
+​​  β​  h2​​c​  i,t − 1 + ​​γ​  h2​​(​  ci,t − 1 × pi,t − 2) + ​​δ​  h2​​​  pi,t − 2
	​+ ​∑hj =−11​  ​​ ​β​  h3​​c​  i,t + h − j + ​​φ​  h1Δ
​​​  yi,t − 1
+ ​​µ​  hi​  ​​ + ​​θ​  hr,t ​​​  + ​​ε​  hi,t ​​.​ 

(3.5)

The sample is restricted to countries with average
annual temperature exceeding 15°C, in which an
increase in temperature has a statistically significant
linear negative impact on economic activity, as in Annex
Table 3.3.1, column (9). Consequently, the weather
shock ci,t refers to average annual temperature and
precipitation. Most of the policy variables pi,t are lagged
to minimize reverse causality concerns and are included
one at a time. As emphasized in the chapter, it is difficult
to interpret causally the coefficients on the interaction
terms, given that the variation in policies and institu-

tions across countries and over time is not random.
Policies and institutions could also be correlated with
relevant country attributes that are not controlled for in
the regression. Moreover, policy data availability varies
significantly in both temporal and country coverage,
resulting in sizable differences in the estimation sample.
For ease of interpretation, in the baseline results, each
policy variable is transformed into an indicator variable
depending on whether, in year t, the country is above or
below the median value of this particular policy in the
estimation sample.54 An exception to this approach is
the measurement of buffers. A country is considered to
have (1) fiscal buffers if public debt as a share of GDP
is less than the 75th percentile, (2) monetary buffers if
annual inflation is less than 10 percent, (3) high international reserves if international reserves minus gold can
cover at least four months of imports, (4) high foreign
aid if foreign aid inflows as a share of GDP are in the
75th percentile, and (5) high remittances if per capita
remittances in real dollars received are greater than the
75th percentile. For exchange rate policy, the analysis
uses an indicator if the de facto exchange rate regime of
a country is not pegged based on the coarse classification
of Reinhart and Rogoff (2004).
Annex Tables 3.3.4 and 3.3.5 present the main findings. For each policy, the tables report the estimated
effect of a 1°C increase in temperature on per capita
output at horizons 0 through 7, where the policy is not
in place and where the policy is in place. The tables
also report the p-value of a statistical test of the difference between the effect of temperature in different
policy scenarios.
The short-term negative effects of temperature
shocks tend to be larger in countries with lower
buffers, as evidenced by the larger estimated responses
in columns (2), (5), and (8) in Annex Table 3.3.4.
However, the differences are typically not statistically
significant, and in the few cases in which they are
(fiscal buffers, foreign aid, and remittances), they tend
to be very short lived. Exchange rate regime, however,
seems to be significantly associated with the extent
of damage caused by weather shocks. Countries with
nonpegged exchange rates tend to recover faster from
these shocks. A similar pattern was documented by
Ramcharan (2009), who finds that exchange rate flexibility helps economies adjust better in the aftermath of
windstorms and earthquakes.
54Results from an alternative specification in which the policy
variables are used in their continuous forms rather than transformed
into indicators are available on request.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

169

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Annex Table 3.3.4. Role of Policy Buffers
(1)
Impact of a 1°C Increase
in Temperature on per
Capita Output
Horizon 0
Horizon 1
Horizon 2
Horizon 3
Horizon 4
Horizon 5
Horizon 6
Horizon 7

Low

High

–1.057***
(0.387)
–1.029**
(0.471)
–0.914*
(0.492)
–1.597***
(0.525)
–1.512**
(0.704)
–0.899
(0.758)
–1.075
(0.844)
–0.552
(0.819)

–1.460***
(0.352)
–1.627***
(0.466)
–1.695**
(0.690)
–2.159***
(0.758)
–1.986**
(0.972)
–1.341
(0.936)
–1.277
(0.867)
–0.633
(0.859)

Adjusted R 2
Number of Countries
Number of Observations
Impact of a 1°C Increase
in Temperature on per
Capita Output
Horizon 0
Horizon 1
Horizon 2
Horizon 3
Horizon 4
Horizon 5
Horizon 6
Horizon 7

(2)

(3)

(4)

Public Debt

High
–0.840**
(0.380)
–0.996**
(0.448)
–0.958**
(0.433)
–0.931*
(0.551)
–0.724
(0.672)
–0.772
(0.635)
–0.753
(0.731)
–0.620
(0.677)

(5)

(6)

Inflation
P-value
0.09
0.24
0.24
0.34
0.46
0.42
0.68
0.87

Low

High

–1.183***
(0.295)
–0.952***
(0.362)
–0.933**
(0.375)
–1.279***
(0.419)
–1.355**
(0.560)
–1.014*
(0.583)
–1.315**
(0.626)
–0.842
(0.610)

–1.275***
(0.322)
–0.985**
(0.425)
–0.907**
(0.416)
–1.333***
(0.429)
–1.487**
(0.571)
–1.181*
(0.628)
–1.572**
(0.675)
–1.032
(0.628)

(7)

(8)

(9)

International Reserves
P-value
0.40
0.87
0.87
0.79
0.55
0.46
0.32
0.52

High

Low

–1.015**
(0.414)
–0.556
(0.492)
–0.952**
(0.390)
–1.182***
(0.404)
–1.404***
(0.522)
–1.390**
(0.609)
–1.524**
(0.614)
–1.566**
(0.629)

–1.171***
(0.314)
–0.782**
(0.395)
–1.030***
(0.382)
–1.140***
(0.411)
–1.440***
(0.522)
–1.270**
(0.603)
–1.362**
(0.597)
–1.353**
(0.611)

P-value
0.52
0.36
0.58
0.78
0.85
0.66
0.55
0.49

0.15
119
4,492

0.12
122
5,365

0.09
127
6,135

Foreign Aid

Remittances

Exchange Rate Flexibility
Not
Pegged
Pegged
P-value
0.16
–1.183*** –1.436***
(0.321)
(0.315)
0.08
–0.792*
–1.249***
(0.426)
(0.415)
0.08
–0.575
–1.191**
(0.483)
(0.503)
0.20
–0.769
–1.342**
(0.574)
(0.600)
0.08
–0.975
–1.853**
(0.781)
(0.801)
0.04
–0.408
–1.556*
(0.830)
(0.851)
0.06
0.011
–1.109
(0.828)
(0.780)
0.05
–0.220
–1.418*
(0.871)
(0.852)

Low
–1.194***
(0.334)
–1.132***
(0.396)
–0.979**
(0.401)
–1.020**
(0.475)
–1.061*
(0.539)
–0.913*
(0.534)
–1.108*
(0.598)
–0.863*
(0.499)

P-value
0.06
0.59
0.94
0.74
0.32
0.70
0.36
0.59

High
–1.345***
(0.337)
–1.212***
(0.389)
–0.799*
(0.436)
–1.271**
(0.530)
–1.260*
(0.678)
–1.182*
(0.691)
–1.571*
(0.842)
–0.900
(0.749)

Low
–1.449***
(0.312)
–1.472***
(0.410)
–1.030**
(0.456)
–1.488***
(0.499)
–1.348**
(0.664)
–1.287**
(0.644)
–1.860**
(0.751)
–1.179
(0.731)

P-value
0.34
0.13
0.31
0.45
0.77
0.76
0.45
0.49

Adjusted R 2
0.16
0.14
0.10
Number of Countries
120
115
115
Number of Observations
5,175
3,441
3,942
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The table presents results from estimating equation (3.5) on a sample of countries with average annual temperature above 15°C. In the regressions, indicators for
policy measures are interacted with temperature, precipitation, and their lags, controlling for country and region-year fixed effects, lags of growth and policy measure,
forwards of temperature and precipitation. Separate regressions are estimated for each horizon. Regression summary statistics are reported for horizon 0. In all specifications, standard errors are clustered at the country level.
* p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.

170

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Annex Table 3.3.5. Role of Structural Policies and Institutions
(1)

(2)

(3)

Domestic Financial Sector Reform
Index

Impact of a 1°C Increase
in Temperature on per
Capita Output
High
Horizon 0
–1.540***
(0.437)
Horizon 1
–1.539***
(0.518)
Horizon 2
–0.413
(0.538)
Horizon 3
–0.964
(0.712)
Horizon 4
–0.325
(0.829)
Horizon 5
–0.707
(0.844)
Horizon 6
–0.644
(0.805)
Horizon 7
–0.071
(0.888)
Adjusted R 2
Number of Countries
Number of Observations

Low
–1.631***
(0.439)
–1.853***
(0.598)
–0.923
(0.711)
–1.724**
(0.854)
–1.118
(0.855)
–1.561*
(0.868)
–1.412*
(0.807)
–0.847
(0.818)

P-value
0.59
0.17
0.15
0.06
0.10
0.13
0.22
0.27

0.24
46
1,455

Impact of a 1°C Increase
in Temperature on per
Physical Capital
Capita Output
High
Low
Horizon 0
–0.773*** –0.861***
(0.294)
(0.302)
Horizon 1
–0.782*
–0.777*
(0.405)
(0.423)
Horizon 2
–0.550
–0.690
(0.442)
(0.459)
Horizon 3
–0.430
–0.820
(0.411)
(0.497)
Horizon 4
–0.543
–1.175**
(0.464)
(0.573)
Horizon 5
–0.953
–1.677**
(0.625)
(0.755)
Horizon 6
–0.381
–1.546**
(0.586)
(0.691)
Horizon 7
–0.548
–1.610*
(0.645)
(0.815)

(4)

(5)

(6)

International Finance Restrictions
Low
–0.766**
(0.293)
–0.906**
(0.391)
–0.622
(0.434)
–1.089**
(0.462)
–1.601***
(0.502)
–1.790**
(0.702)
–1.608***
(0.594)
–1.525**
(0.682)

High
–1.139***
(0.275)
–1.054***
(0.367)
–1.090**
(0.472)
–1.359***
(0.487)
–1.757***
(0.529)
–2.180***
(0.761)
–1.868***
(0.615)
–1.975***
(0.718)

P-value
0.07
0.50
0.10
0.39
0.69
0.41
0.59
0.39

(7)

(8)
Human Capital

High
–1.039***
(0.291)
–0.891**
(0.411)
–0.669
(0.437)
–1.065**
(0.475)
–1.345**
(0.527)
–1.161
(0.699)
–1.009
(0.685)
–0.657
(0.736)

0.13
74
3,434

P-value
0.66
0.99
0.69
0.30
0.15
0.17
0.09
0.14

(9)

Low
–1.152***
(0.349)
–1.250***
(0.420)
–1.092**
(0.494)
–1.250**
(0.491)
–1.686***
(0.576)
–1.590**
(0.704)
–1.689**
(0.724)
–1.236*
(0.715)

P-value
0.63
0.25
0.27
0.64
0.49
0.46
0.34
0.44

0.12
89
4,582

Political Regime Index
High
Low
P-value
–1.370*** –1.452***
0.73
(0.328)
(0.293)
–1.132*** –1.392***
0.27
(0.393)
(0.367)
–1.110*** –1.729***
0.01
(0.416)
(0.433)
–1.374*** –1.929***
0.03
(0.466)
(0.464)
–1.599*** –2.095***
0.09
(0.566)
(0.601)
–1.587**
–2.044***
0.15
(0.671)
(0.705)
–1.416**
–2.128***
0.06
(0.679)
(0.704)
–1.325*
–2.320***
0.02
(0.751)
(0.788)

Low
–1.336***
(0.431)
–1.034*
(0.580)
–0.814
(0.584)
–0.947
(0.714)
–0.819
(0.827)
–0.699
(0.899)
–1.061
(0.930)
–0.233
(1.060)

Inequality
High
–1.559***
(0.390)
–1.240**
(0.588)
–1.024*
(0.591)
–1.386*
(0.738)
–1.391*
(0.820)
–1.634*
(0.877)
–2.067**
(0.913)
–1.320
(0.998)

P-value
0.07
0.26
0.35
0.09
0.06
0.01
0.01
0.01

Adjusted R 2
0.13
0.10
0.28
Number of Countries
114
106
95
Number of Observations
3,905
5,056
1,798
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The table presents results from estimating equation (3.5) on a sample of countries with average annual temperature above 15°C. In the regressions,
indicators for policy measures are interacted with temperature, precipitation, and their lags, controlling for country and region-year fixed effects, lags of growth
and policy measure, forwards of temperature and precipitation. Separate regressions are estimated for each horizon. Regression summary statistics are reported
for horizon 0. In all specifications, standard errors are clustered at the country level.
* p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

171

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Annex Table 3.3.6. Role of Development: Evidence from Subnational Data
Impact of a 1°C Increase in
Temperature on per Capita Output
Horizon 0
Horizon 1
Horizon 2
Horizon 3
Horizon 4
Horizon 5
Horizon 6
Horizon 7

Full Sample
(1)
–0.705***
(0.174)
–0.908***
(0.263)
–0.599**
(0.290)
–0.543
(0.340)
–0.752*
(0.386)
–1.246***
(0.460)
–1.156**
(0.478)
–1.333**
(0.527)

Advanced
Economies

Non-Advanced
Economies

–0.025
(0.159)
0.320
(0.232)
0.952***
(0.350)
1.089***
(0.339)
0.736*
(0.385)
0.485
(0.510)
0.005
(0.526)
0.145
(0.601)

(2)
–0.727***
(0.210)
–0.978***
(0.315)
–0.768**
(0.357)
–0.875**
(0.429)
–1.130**
(0.499)
–1.321**
(0.588)
–1.596**
(0.646)
–1.496**
(0.714)

P-value
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.04
0.10
0.13

0.20
Adjusted R 2
0.18
Number of Countries
44
7
37
Number of Provinces
607
51
556
16,148
Number of Observations
16,148
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Regression (2) presents results from estimating equation (3.5) using subnational data on a sample of provinces with average annual temperature above
15°C. In the regression, the indicator for whether a province is located in an advanced economy is interacted with temperature, precipitation, their lags, lag of
growth, and region-year fixed effects; controlling for province fixed effects and forwards of temperature and precipitation. Separate regressions are estimated
for each horizon. Regression summary statistics are reported for horizon 0. In all specifications, standard errors are clustered at the province level.
* p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.

The medium-term negative effects of temperature
shocks tend to be smaller in countries with better
structural policies and institutions (Annex Table 3.3.5).
Standard errors are again quite large, and it is often
difficult to reject the hypothesis that policies do not
have an effect, but the point estimates of the effect of
temperature shocks in the outer horizons are substantially larger in columns (2), (5), and (8). This evidence
is in line with findings in the literature on the role of
policies in attenuating the effects of natural disasters.
See, among others, Kahn (2005); Noy (2009); Cavallo
and others (2013); Felbermayr and Gröschl (2014);
and Breckner and others (2016) for the role of institutional strength and democracy; Noy (2009); Von Peter,
Dahlen, and Saxena (2012); McDermott, Barry, and Tol
(2013); Felbermayr and Gröschl (2014); and Breckner
and others (2016) for the role of financial markets; and
Noy (2009); Raddatz (2009); and Von Peter, Dahlen,
and Saxena (2012) for the role of development status.

The Role of Development
The chapter examines whether the overall level of
development attenuates the negative effects of temperature shocks in hot countries, using subnational
172

cross-country data. Combining subnational growth
data from roughly 1,460 provinces and states across 79
countries from Gennaioli and others (2014) and annual
temperature and precipitation data at the same level of
aggregation, the analysis confirms that there is a nonlinear
relationship between subnational growth and temperature
by estimating equation (3.2). It then zooms in on the set
of provinces and states with average temperature greater
than 15°C to examine whether economic activity in the
“hot” states or provinces of advanced economies responds
to a temperature increase in the same way as in states or
provinces of emerging market and developing economies
with a similar average temperature. Equation (3.5) is
estimated with pi,t taking the value of 1 for states or provinces located in advanced economies. pi,t is also interacted
with lag of growth, ​​µ​ ih​  ​​denote state or province fixed
effects, and region-year fixed effects, ​​θ​  hr,t ​​,​  are allowed
to vary across advanced and non-advanced economies.
Standard errors are clustered at the province level.
Annex Table 3.3.6 presents the estimated effects
of a 1°C increase in temperature at horizons 0 to 7
in all subnational regions with temperature greater
than 15°C in column (1). The subsequent columns
present the estimated effects for subnational regions in
advanced and non-advanced economies, as well as the

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Annex Table 3.4.1. Effect of Weather Shocks and Natural Disasters on Emigration, 1980–2015
Percent of Emigrants in
Total Population
Temperature
Precipitation

(1)
3.963
(2.522)
–0.206
(0.710)

Temperature × LIDC
Precipitation × LIDC

(2)
8.008*
(4.477)
–0.477
(0.880)
–7.475*
(4.253)
0.935
(1.022)

Number of Natural Disasters
War

(3)
8.067*
(4.476)
–0.484
(0.878)
–7.672*
(4.255)
0.918
(1.018)
0.228*
(0.138)

(4)
8.134*
(4.357)
–0.484
(0.881)
–7.788*
(4.092)
0.929
(1.024)
0.228*
(0.136)
0.409
(2.283)

Number of Natural Disasters × LIDC

(5)
8.127*
(4.480)
–0.491
(0.878)
–7.571*
(4.249)
0.972
(1.039)
0.458
(0.281)

–0.358
(0.309)

War × LIDC
Adjusted R 2
0.04
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
Number of Observations
337
337
337
337
337
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: All specifications include country-of-origin fixed effects, decade-region fixed effects, and decade fixed effects interacted with a dummy for
low-income developing country (LIDC). Standard errors are clustered at the country level.
* p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.

p-value of a test of their difference. The negative effects
of temperature shocks are felt much more heavily in
non-advanced economies.

Annex 3.4. The Impact of Weather Changes and
Natural Disasters on International Migration
This annex provides additional details on the empirical
analysis of the effect of temperature shocks and natural
disasters on international migration. The analysis relies
on data from Özden and others (2011) on emigrant
stocks for 117 economies with average temperature
greater than 15°C between 1980 and 2015. Migrant
stocks, which are available at 10-year intervals, are differenced to compute net emigrant flows in each decade.
Building on Cattaneo and Peri (2016), the analysis
estimates the following specification:
​​Emigrant​ i,d​​  = ​α + γT​ i,d​​  + β ​Ti,d
​  ​​  × ​LIDC​ i​​ ​  +  μP​ i,d​​ 
+ θ ​Pi,d
​  ​​  × ​LIDC​ i​​  + ​ρDisaster​ i,d​​​
	​+ τ ​Disaster​ i,d​​  × ​LIDC​ i​​  + ​μ​  i​​ 
+ ​θ​  r,d​​  + ​φ​  d​​  × ​LIDC​ i​​  + ​ϵ​  i,d​​,​	

(3.6)

in which i indexes countries, d indexes decades,55
Emigrant is the net flow of emigrants over the decade
as a percentage of the total population of the origin
(source) country, T is the average temperature and P
the average precipitation for the decade, and Disaster
is the average number of natural disasters for each
55The

2010 decade includes data up to 2015.

(6)
8.074*
(4.287)
–0.492
(0.880)
–7.634*
(4.088)
0.992
(1.033)
0.465*
(0.269)
–0.418
(3.771)
–0.359
(0.296)
1.216
(4.034)
0.05
337

country-decade. The latter three variables are further
interacted with a dummy identifying low-income developing countries (LIDC) to capture potential differences
in the emigration response to the weather fluctuations
and natural disasters. As in Cattaneo and Peri (2016),
the regression further controls for country fixed effects
(​​μ​  i​​​), region-decade fixed effects (​​θ​  r,d​​​), and decade fixed
effects interacted with the LIDC dummy. The random
error term ​​ϵ​  i,d​​​is clustered at the country level.56 The
specification is purposefully parsimonious. Controls
typically included as determinants of migrations, such
as population size, sociopolitical environment, and
others, could themselves be affected by weather fluctuations and natural disasters. In a robustness check, the
exercise controls for the incidence of war, an important
push factor for emigration, although arguably this
could be yet another channel through which weather
fluctuations trigger movements of people (see Burke,
Hsiang, and Miguel 2015b).
Annex Table 3.4.1 reports the main findings from
estimating equation (3.6). Higher average temperatures
56Following Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012), the specification includes only fixed effects as controls, since other potential
controls, such as population size or sociopolitical environment,
may themselves be affected by agricultural productivity—a key
channel through which weather shocks may influence emigration—
potentially producing a bias in the estimation by introducing an
overcontrolling problem. The only exception is a dummy for wars
(see Beaton and others 2017), which is included in some of the
specifications and confirms the robustness of the findings.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

173

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

over a decade do not have a significant effect on emigration in the full sample of countries (column [1]).
However, once the response is allowed to vary across
broad groups of countries, the results suggest that in
countries that are not classified as low income, higher
temperature is indeed associated with greater emigration flows (column [2]). A 1°C increase in average
decadal temperature leads to an increase in the share
of net emigrants of about 8 percentage points (which
is equivalent to one standard deviation in the sample
investigated).57 Similarly, more natural disasters over a
decade also increase net emigration flows, especially in
countries not classified as low income.58

Annex 3.5. Model-Based Analysis
The model used to analyze the long-term impact
of climate change and simulate the effects of policies
in Box 3.2 is developed and presented in Buffie and
others (2012). It is commonly known as the Debt,
Investment, and Growth (DIG) model and has served
as a workhorse in many IMF studies of low-income
countries. The DIG is an optimizing intertemporal
model with perfect foresight. It describes a two-sector
small open economy model with private and public capital, learning by doing, and endogenous fiscal
policies. Public capital is productive and is used in
the production function in both sectors. Government
spending can raise output directly by augmenting the
stock of public capital and can crowd in and crowd
out private investment.
Firms operate Cobb-Douglas technologies to combine labor, private capital, and public capital (infrastructure) into output in the traded and nontraded
sectors. The evolution of total factor productivity
(TFP) is exogenous in both sectors. Firms face separate
prices for exports, and imports and are assumed to be
profit maximizing.
Consumers supply labor and derive utility from
consuming the domestic traded good, the foreign
traded good, and the domestic nontraded good.
57The flow of emigrants as a share of population in countries
that are not classified as low income in this sample is 2.5 percent,
on average, with a standard deviation of 8.1 percentage points. For
low-income countries, these statistics are 0.6 percent and 2.2 percentage points, respectively.
58Results (not shown here and available on request) are robust to
the use of other proxies for low-income countries, such as a dummy
identifying the countries in the bottom quartile of the average GDP
per capita distribution of the country sample during the full sample
period analyzed.

174

These goods are combined into a constant elasticity of
substitution basket, and savers maximize the present value of their lifetime utility. The model breaks
Ricardian equivalence by including both savers and
hand-to-mouth consumers.
The government spends on transfers, debt service,
and (partially inefficient) infrastructure investment. It
collects revenue from the consumption value-added
tax and from user fees for infrastructure services. The
deficit is financed through domestic borrowing, external concessional borrowing, or external commercial
borrowing. Policymakers accept all concessional loans
offered by official creditors. The borrowing and amortization schedule for these loans is fixed exogenously.
Debt sustainability requires that the value-added tax
and transfers eventually adjust to cover the entire deficit, given the exogenously determined upper limit on
taxes and lower limit on transfers. The model incorporates shocks to the government external debt risk
premium (or world interest rates).
The majority of the model parameters are set to
the same values as in Buffie and others (2012), with
few exceptions, mostly to reflect the decline in global
interest rates, the projection of trend GDP growth
in low-income countries, and the sample median of
public-debt-to-GDP ratios. The parameters that differ
from the ones in Buffie and others (2012) are presented in Annex Table 3.5.1.

Simulating the Long-Term Impact of Climate Change
To trace the long-term impact of climate change,
the model incorporates the estimated relationship
between temperature and per capita output discussed
in Annex 3.3 and presented in Annex Table 3.3.1,
column (5). The effect is assumed to occur through
temperature’s effect on TFP; therefore, the estimated
parameters are rescaled so that the model matches the
empirically estimated decline of GDP if temperature
increases by 1°C.59
The temperature during 2017–2100 is assumed to
follow one of two alternative scenarios: Representative
Concentration Pathway (RCP) 4.5 or RCP 8.5. The
temperature increases during 2017–2100 are calculated
for the median low-income country in the sample and
are equal to 2.0°C and 3.9°C for RCP 4.5 and RCP
8.5, respectively.
59Estimates of the damage to GDP cannot be used directly given
that GDP is endogenous.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Annex Table 3.5.1. Parameterization of the Debt, Investment, and Growth Model
Parameter
Initial Return on Infrastructure Investment
Public Domestic Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Public Concessional Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Public External Commercial Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Oil Revenues-to-GDP Ratio
Real Interest Rate on Public Domestic Debt
Real Interest Rate on Public External Commercial Debt
Trend per Capita Growth Rate
Sources: Buffie and others (2012); and IMF staff calculations.

There are two sources of uncertainty in the
simulation—the uncertainty of RCP projections
and the uncertainty of the effect of temperature on
TFP. Both sources of uncertainty are combined in
the analysis as follows. The upper-bound scenario is
simulated assuming that the temperature increase is
equal to the lowest 5th percentile for each RCP.60
To account for the uncertainty of estimated parameters, the TFP parameters are set to the conditional
expected value for the upper 50 percent of the TFP
distribution. The worst lower-bound scenario is simulated analogously.

Modeling Structural Transformation

Value (percent)
30
10
30
5
2
7
4
2.8

temperatures, the employment share of nontraded
goods increases from the baseline value of 42.27 percent to 65 percent over 90 years.

Modeling Optimal Adaptation
Box 3.2 extends the original DIG model to incorporate direct investment in adaptation strategies. The
main addition is the inclusion of private adaptation
and public subsidies to private adaptation, whereas
damages are modeled as before. In the absence of any
adaptation measure, increased temperature causes
gross damage, denoted by ​G ​Djt​  ​​​, at time t in sector j.
The gross damage is expressed as a fraction of sectoral output:

Structural transformation is generated in the DIG
model by introducing diverging trends in sectoral TFP
growth, along the lines of Ngai and Pissarides (2007).
In their model, faster productivity growth in the
traded goods sector goes along with a decline in the
relative price of traded versus nontraded goods. Given
complementarity in final demand, production in the
former sector relative to the latter does not increase
in the same proportion. The value share of the traded
goods sector eventually shrinks, even in the presence
of international trade. While this approach relies on
only one potential driver of structural transformation,
it generates the desired increase in employment and
nominal-value-added shares of the nontraded goods
sector, which is mostly composed of services. The gap
in sectoral TFP growth rates is set to replicate the
average increase in the service share of value added in
low-income developing countries in 1990–2015, which
has risen at the rate of 2.5 percentage points a decade.
Given this calibration, in the scenario without rising

  ϕ ​​ ,
​​Ωi,jt
​  ​​  = ​ _____________
¯​​  jt​​​)​​​​  ​
​Oi,jt
​  ​​ ​​(​​A ​Di,jt
​  ​​, ​​ AD
in which the marginal damage reduction from adaptation spending is decreasing. The positive parameter
ϕ is the elasticity of damage reduction to the level
of adaptation.
If the cost of a unit of protection is equal to ​​P​ AD,t​​​
and the functional form for the capacity to adapt is ​​​
¯​​  jt​​; ς​)​​  = A ​Di,jt
¯​​  ςjt​​​​  (with ​0 ≤ ς ≤ 1​),
O​ i,jt(​​​ ​​A ​Di,jt
​  ​​, ​​ AD
​  ​​ ​​ AD
then cost minimization by firms in the symmetric

60Here, the 5–95 percent confidence intervals for the temperature
increases are 1.2°C to 2.8°C and 2.8°C to 5.1°C for RCP 4.5 and
RCP 8.5, respectively.

61Many adaptation measures have the nature of public goods;
hence, firms benefit from total sectoral protection spending.

G ​Djt​  ​​

​​g ​djt​  ​​  = ​ _
f ​(​​T )​ ​​​​.
q​ ​ jt ​ =
​​
Gross damage can be reduced by investing in adaptation. Firm i’s capacity to adapt to climate change is
denoted by ​​O​ i,jt​​​. It is increasing in firm i’s protection
expenditures ​A ​Di,jt
​  ​​​as well as in the total sectoral protection expenditures AD
​​​  ¯​​  jt​​  = ​∫01​   ​​  ​A ​Di,jt
​  ​​  di​.61 The residual
damage for firm i in sector j is
g ​djt​  ​​

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

175

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

¯​​  jt​​​ determines the optimal
equilibrium ​A ​Di,jt
​  ​​  = ​​ AD
level of adaptation expenditure for each firm
1
_________
​ 
 ​

G ​Djt​  ​​ 1 + ϕ​(​​1 + ς​)​​
​​
​A ​Di,jt
​  ​​  = ​​ ​​ϕ ​ ____ ​​ ​​​​ 
​  ​​ )
( ​PAD,t

The optimal level of firm-specific residual
damage is then
g ​djt​  ​​

 ​,​
​​Ωjt​  ​​  = ​ _______
ϕ​(​​1 + ς​)​​
A ​Djt​  ​ 

​

which can be shown to be socially suboptimal.
The social planner’s cost function, ​​TotD​ i,jt​​,​ differs
from that of individual firms
​Tot ​Di,jt
​  SP​  ​  = G ​Djt​  ​​ ​​(​​A ​Djt​  SP​  ​​)​​​​ 

−ϕ​(​​1 + ς​)​​

​ + ​PAD,t
​  ​​  A ​Djt​  SP​  ​​ .

Minimizing the social cost gives socially optimal
adaptation expenditures
1
​ _________
 ​

​A ​Djt​  SP​  ​ 

G ​Djt​  ​​ 1 + ϕ​(​​1 + ς​)​​
= ​​ ​​ϕ​ ​​1 + ς​ ​​ ​ ____ ​​ ​​​​ 
​​
​  ​​ ]
[ (
) ​PAD,t

It can be shown that private agents invest less than
the socially optimal amount. The adaptation spending
gap (as a fraction of the socially optimal adaptation
spending) is equal to
1  ​​ ​​​​ 
​1 − ​​(​​ ​ ____
1 + ς)

1
_________
​ 
 ​
1 + ϕ​(​​1 + ς​)​​

​​ .

It can also be shown that the socially optimal
amount of adaptation expenditures can be achieved if
subsidies in the amount of ​​υ​  ς,jt​​​per unit cost of protection are paid by the government to the firms
ς

​​υ​  ς,jt​​  = ​ _____
 ​​ .
(​ ​​1 + ς​)​​

176

Annex 3.6. Reduced Form Approach to
Estimating Potential Long-Term Effects of
Climate Change
Indicative evidence of the potential impacts of climate
change and their distribution across the globe could
also be gleaned by combining the estimated sensitivity
of per capita output to temperature increase (Annex
Table 3.3.1, column [5]), baseline annual temperatures,
and projected temperature changes for each geographic
location. As in the modeling exercise, this analysis
takes the most conservative approach and assumes
temperature increases have a permanent level, rather
than growth, effect on per capita output. The estimated
cumulative impact on 2100 per capita GDP under the
Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 4.5 and
RCP 8.5 scenarios are presented in Annex Figure 3.6.1.
It is important to note that this exercise captures the
likely impact of one particular aspect of climate change,
namely temperature increases. The macroeconomic
effects of many expected or possible events (such as
higher incidence of natural disasters, rising sea levels,
ocean acidification, and the like) are not quantified in
this exercise. Furthermore, the analysis abstracts from
cross-border spillovers that may arise if climate change
triggers more frequent epidemics, famines, and other
natural disasters along with social unrest, armed conflict,
and associated refugee flows.
The analysis suggests that the projected warming
will have uneven effects across the globe. However, the
increase in temperature, especially under the RCP 8.5
scenario, will push many advanced economies beyond
the threshold temperature level, thus triggering direct
economic losses for these countries as well.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Annex Figure 3.6.1. The Long-Term Impact of Temperature Increase on Real per Capita Output across the Globe
(Percent)

1. RCP 4.5 Scenario

12 +
8
4
0
–4

2. RCP 8.5 Scenario

18 +
12
6
0
–6
–12

Sources: National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled Projections (NEX-GDDP); World Bank Group Cartography
Unit; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The maps depict the effect of the projected increase in temperature between 2005 and 2100 under RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 scenarios on real per capita output in
2100. Gray areas indicate the estimated impact is not statistically signiﬁcant. RCP = Representative Concentration Pathways.

References
Abiad, Abdul, Enrica Detragiache, and Thierry Tressel. 2008. “A
New Database of Financial Reforms.” IMF Working Paper
08/266, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson.
2001. “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development:
An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review 91
(5): 1369–401.
Acevedo, Sebastian. 2014. “Debt, Growth, and Natural Disasters:
A Caribbean Trilogy.” IMF Working Paper 14/125, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

———. 2016. “Gone with the Wind: Estimating Hurricane and
Climate Change Costs in the Caribbean.” IMF Working Paper
16/199, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Altuǧ, Sumru, and Robert A. Miller. 1998. “The Effect of Work
Experience on Female Wages and Labour Supply.” Review of
Economic Studies 65 (1): 45–85.
Andersen, Thomas Barnebeck, Carl-Johan Dalgaard, and Pablo
Selaya. 2016. “Climate and the Emergence of Global Income
Differences.” Review of Economic Studies 83 (4): 1334–63.
Anthoff, David, and Richard Tol. 2010. “FUND–Climate
Framework for Uncertainty, Negotiation and Distribution.”

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

177

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

https://​yosemite​​.epa​​.gov/​​ee/​​epa/​​eerm​​.nsf/​​vwAN/​​EE​​-0564​​-101​​
.pdf/​​$file/​​EE​​-0564​​-101​​.pdf.
Ashraf, Quamrul, and Stelios Michalopoulos. 2015. “Climatic
Fluctuations and the Diffusion of Agriculture.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 97 (3): 589–609.
Auffhammer, Maximilian, Solomon M. Hsiang, Wolfram
Schlenker, and Adam Sobel. 2011. “Global Climate
Models and Climate Data: A User Guide for Economists.”
Unpublished.
Baez, Javier, German Caruso, Valerie Mueller, and Chiyu Niu.
2017. “Heat Exposure and Youth Migration in Central America and the Caribbean.” American Economic Review: Papers
and Proceedings 107 (5): 446–50.
Bakkensen, Laura, and Lint Barrage. 2016. “Do Disasters Affect
Growth? A Macro Model-Based Perspective on the Empirical
Debate.” Working Paper, Department of Economics, Brown
University, Providence, RI.
Barreca, Alan I. 2012. “Climate Change, Humidity, and Mortality in the United States.” Journal of Environmental Economics
and Management 63 (1): 19–34.
———, Karen Clay, Olivier Deschênes, Michael Greenstone,
and Joseph Shapiro. 2016. “Adapting to Climate Change: The
Remarkable Decline in the US Temperature-Mortality Relationship over the 20th Century.” Journal of Political Economy
124 (1): 105–59.
Barrios, Salvador, Luisito Bertinelli, and Eric Strobl. 2006.
“Climatic Change and Rural-Urban Migration: The Case
of Sub-Saharan Africa.” Journal of Urban Economics 60 (3):
357–71.
———, Luisito Bertinelli, and Eric Strobl. 2010. “Trends in
Rainfall and Economic Growth in Africa: A Neglected Cause
of the African Growth Tragedy.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 32 (2): 350–66.
Barrios, Salvador, Ouattara Bazoumana, and Eric Strobl. 2008.
“The Impact of Climatic Change on Agricultural Production:
Is It Different for Africa?” Food Policy 33: 287–98.
Baum, Anja, Andrew Hodge, Aiko Mineshima, Marialuz Moreno
Badia, and René Tapsoba. 2017. “Can They Do It All? Fiscal
Space in Low-Income Countries.” IMF Working Paper 17/110,
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Beaton, Kimberly, Svetlana Cerovic, Misael Galdamez, Metodij
Hadzi-Vaskov, Franz Loyola, Zsóka Kóczán, Bogdan Lissovolik, Jan Kees Martijn, Yulia Ustyugova, and Joyce Wong.
2017. “Migration and Remittances in Latin America and the
Caribbean: Engines of Growth and Macroeconomic Stabilizers?” IMF Working Paper 17/144, International Monetary
Fund, Washington, DC.
Bertinelli, Luisito, and Eric Strobl. 2013. “Quantifying the Local
Economic Growth Impact of Hurricane Strikes: An Analysis
from Outer Space for the Caribbean.” Journal of Applied
Meteorology and Climatology 52: 1688–97.
Black, Richard, Stephen R. G. Bennett, Sandy M. Thomas,
and John R. Beddington. 2011. “Migration as Adaptation.”
Nature 478: 447–49.

178

Bluedorn, John, Akos Valentinyi, and Michael Vlassopoulos. 2009.
“The Long-Lived Effects of Historic Climate on the Wealth of
Nations.” CEPR Discussion Paper 7572, Centre for Economic
Policy Research, London.
Bohra-Mishra, Pratikshya, Michael Oppenheimer, and Solomon M. Hsiang. 2014. “Nonlinear Permanent Migration
Response to Climatic Variations but Minimal Response to
Disasters.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111
(27): 9780–85.
Boustan, Leah P., Matthew E. Kahn, and Paul W. Rhode.
2012. “Moving to Higher Ground: Migration Response to
Natural Disasters in the Early Twentieth Century.” American
Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 102 (3): 238–44.
Breckner, Miriam, Florian Englmaier, Till Stowasser, and Uwe
Sunde. 2016. “Economic Development and Resilience to
Natural Catastrophes—Insurance Penetration and Institutions.” Unpublished.
Bryan, Gharad, Shyamal Chowdhury, and Ahmed M. Mobarak.
2014. “Underinvestment in a Profitable Technology: The
Case of Seasonal Migration in Bangladesh.” Econometrica 82
(5): 1671–748.
Buckley, Brendan M., Kevin J. Anchukaitis, Daniel Penny,
Roland Fletcher, Edward R. Cook, Masaki Sano, Le Canh
Nam, Aroonrut Wichienkeeo, Ton That Minh, and Truong
Mai Hong. 2010. “Climate as a Contributing Factor in the
Demise of Angkor, Cambodia.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 107 (15): 6748–52.
Buffie, Edward, Andrew Berg, Catherine Pattillo, Rafael Portillo,
and Luis-Felipe Zanna. 2012. “Public Investment, Growth,
and Debt Sustainability: Putting Together the Pieces.” IMF
Working Paper 12/144, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Büntgen, Ulf, Willy Tegel, Kurt Nicolussi, Michael McCormick,
David Frank, Valerie Trouet, Jed O. Kaplan, Franz Herzig,
Karl-Uwe Heussner, Heinz Wanner, Jürg Luterbacher, and
Jan Esper. 2011. “2500 Years of European Climate Variability
and Human Susceptibility.” Science 331 (6017): 578–82.
Burgess, Robin, Olivier Deschênes, Dave Donaldson, and
Michael Greenstone. 2014. “The Unequal Effects of
Weather and Climate Change: Evidence from Mortality in India.” Unpublished. www​.lse​.ac​​.uk/​​economics/​​
people/​​facultyPersonalPages/​​facultyFiles/​​RobinBurgess/​​
UnequalEffectsOfWeatherAndClimateChange140514​​.pdf.
Burke, Marshall, and Kyle Emerick. 2016. “Adaptation to
Climate Change: Evidence from US Agriculture.” American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8 (3): 106–40.
Burke, Marshall, Solomon M. Hsiang, and Edward
Miguel. 2015a. “Global Non-Linear Effect of Temperature on
Economic Production.” Nature 527: 235–39.
———. 2015b. “Climate and Conflict.” Annual Review of
Economics 7: 577–617.
Burke, Paul J., and Andrew Leigh. 2010. “Do Output Contractions Trigger Democratic Change?” American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (4): 124–57.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Cabezon, Ezequiel, Leni Hunter, Patrizia Tumbarello, Kazuaki
Washimi, and Yigun Wu. 2015. “Enhancing Macroeconomic
Resilience to Natural Disasters and Climate Change in the
Small States of the Pacific.” IMF Working Paper 15/125,
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Calderón, César, Enrique Moral-Benito, and Luis Servén. 2015.
“Is Infrastructure Capital Productive? A Dynamic Heterogeneous Approach.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 30
(2): 177–98.
Carleton, Tamma A. 2017. “Crop-Damaging Temperatures
Increase Suicide Rates in India.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 114 (33): 8746–51.
———, and Solomon M. Hsiang. 2016. “Social and Economic
Impacts of Climate.” Science 353 (6304).
Cashin, Paul, Kamiar Mohaddes, and Mehdi Raissi. 2017. “Fair
Weather or Foul? The Macroeconomic Effects of El Niño.”
Journal of International Economics 106: 37–54.
Cattaneo, Cristina, and Giovanni Peri. 2016. “The Migration
Response to Increasing Temperatures.” Journal of Development
Economics 122: 127–46.
Cavallo, Edurardo, Sebastian Galiani, Ilan Noy, and Juan Pantano. 2013. “Catastrophic Natural Disasters and Economic
Growth.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (5): 1549–61.
Center for International Earth Science Information Network
(CIESIN) Columbia University. 2016. Gridded Population
of the World, Version 4 (GPWv4): Population Count. NASA
Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC), Palisades, NY. http://​​dx​​.doi​​.org/​​10​​.7927/​​H4X63JVC. Accessed
March 15, 2017.
———, United Nations Food and Agriculture Programme
(FAO), and Centro Internacional de Agricultura Tropical
(CIAT). 2005. Gridded Population of the World, Version
3 (GPWv3): Population Count Grid. NASA Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC), Palisades,
NY. http://​​dx​​.doi​​.org/​​10​​.7927/​​H4639MPP. Accessed
March 15, 2017.
Chamberlain, Gary. 1980. “Analysis of Covariance with Qualitative Data.” Review of Economic Studies 47: 225–38.
Chaney, Eric. 2013. “Revolt on the Nile: Economic Shocks,
Religion, and Political Power.” Econometrica 81: 2033–53.
Chen, Chen, Ian Noble, Jessica Hellmann, Joyce Coffee, Martin
Murillo, and Nitesh Chawla. 2015. University of Notre Dame
Global Adaptation Index. Country Index Technical Report.
Chen, Joyce J., Valerie Mueller, Yuanyuan Jia, and Steven
Kuo-Hsin Tseng. 2017. “Validating Migration Responses to
Flooding Using Satellite and Vital Registration Data.” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 107 (5): 441–45.
Cole, Shawn, Gautam Bastian, Sangita Vyas, Carina Wendel,
and Daniel Stein. 2012. “The Effectiveness of Index-Based
Micro-Insurance in Helping Smallholders Manage
Weather-Related Risks.” London: Evidence for Policy and
Practice Information and Co-ordinating (EPPI) Centre,
Social Science Research Unit, Institute of Education, University of London.

Cole, Shawn, Xavier Gine, Jeremy Tobacman, Petia Topalova,
Robert Townsend, and James Vickery. 2013. “Barriers to
Household Risk Management: Evidence from India.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5: 104–35.
Colmer, Jonathan. 2016. “Weather Labor Reallocation and
Industrial Production: Evidence from India.” Unpublished,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Cook, John, Dana Nuccitelli, Sarah A. Green, Mark Richardson,
Bärbel Winkler, Rob Painting, Robert Way, Peter Jacobs,
and Andrew Skuce. 2013. “Quantifying the Consensus on
Anthropogenic Global Warming in the Scientific Literature.”
Environmental Research Letters 8 (2).
Cook, John, Naomi Oreskes, Peter T. Doran, William Anderegg,
Bart Verheggen, Ed W. Maibach, J. Stuart Carlton, Stephan
Lewandowsky, Andrew G. Skuce, Sarah A. Green, Dana Nuccitelli, Peter Jacobs, Mark Richardson, Bärbel Winkler, Rob
Painting, and Ken Rice. 2016. “Consensus on Consensus: A
Synthesis of Consensus Estimates on Human-Caused Global
Warming.” Environmental Research Letters 11 (4).
Cooper, Gail. 2002. “Air-Conditioning America: Engineers and
the Controlled Environment, 1900–1960.” Johns Hopkins
Studies in the History of Technology. Baltimore, MD: Johns
Hopkins University Press.
Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, and Cory Smith. 2016.
“Evolving Comparative Advantage and the Impact of Climate
Change in Agricultural Markets: Evidence from 1.7 Million
Fields around the World.” Journal of Political Economy 124
(1): 205–48.
Cullen, H., P. B. deMenocal, S. Hemming, G. Hemming, F.
H. Brown, T. Guilderson, and F. Sirocko. 2000. “Climate
Change and the Collapse of the Akkadian Empire: Evidence
from the Deep Sea.” Geology 28 (4): 379–82.
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2012.
“Temperature Shocks and Economic Growth: Evidence from
the Last Half Century.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (3): 66–95.
———. 2014. “What Do We Learn from the Weather? The
New Climate–Economy Literature.” Journal of Economic Literature 52 (3): 740–98.
Deryugina, Tatyana. 2011. “The Role of Transfer Payments in
Mitigating Shocks: Evidence from the Impact of Hurricanes.”
Munich Personal RePEc Archive (MPRA) Paper 53307, Munich.
———, and Solomon M. Hsiang. 2014. “Does the Environment Still Matter? Daily Temperature and Income in the
United States.” NBER Working Paper 20750, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Deschênes, Olivier. 2012. “Temperature, Human Health and
Adaptation: A Review of the Empirical Literature.” NBER
Working Paper 18345, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
———, and Michael Greenstone. 2011. “Climate Change,
Mortality, and Adaptation: Evidence from Annual Fluctuations in Weather in the US.” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics 3 (4): 152–85.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

179

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Fankhauser, Samuel, and Richard Tol. 2005. “On Climate
Change and Economic Growth.” Resource and Energy Economics 27: 1–17.
Farid, Mai, Michael Keen, Michael Papaioannou, Ian Parry,
Catherine Pattillo, and Anna Ter-Martirosyan. 2016. “After
Paris: Fiscal, Macroeconomic, and Financial Implications of
Climate Change.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 16/01, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Felbermayr, Gabriel, and Jasmin Gröschl. 2014. “Naturally
Negative: The Growth Effects of Natural Disasters.” Journal of
Development Economics 111: 92–106.
Feng, Shuaizhang, Alan B. Krueger, and Michael Oppenheimer.
2010. “Linkages among Climate Change, Crop Yields, and
Mexico–US Cross-Border Migration.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 107 (32): 14257–62.
Feng, Shuaizhang, Michael Oppenheimer, and Wolfram
Schlenker. 2012. “Climate Change, Crop Yields, and Internal
Migration in the United States.” NBER Working Paper 17734,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Fenske, James, and Namrata Kala. 2015. “Climate and the Slave
Trade.” Journal of Development Economics 112: 19–32.
Fomby, Thomas, Yuki Ikeda, and Norman Loayza. 2013. “The
Growth Aftermath of Natural Disasters.” Journal of Applied
Econometrics 28 (3): 412–34.
Foster, Vivien, and Cecilia Briceno-Garmendia. 2010.
Africa’s Infrastructure: A Time for Transformation. Africa
Development Forum. Washington, DC: World Bank.
https://​​openknowledge​​.worldbank​​.org/​​handle/​​10986/​​2692.
Galor, Oded. 2011. Unified Growth Theory. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Garg, Teevrat, Maulik Jagnani, and Viz Taraz. 2017. “Human
Capital Costs of Climate Change: Evidence from Test Scores
in India.” Unpublished.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez De Silanes,
and Andrei Shleifer. 2014. “Growth in Regions.” Journal of
Economic Growth 19 (3): 259–309.
Gerling, Kerstin. Forthcoming. “The Macro-Fiscal Aftermath
of Weather-Related Disasters in Developing Asia: Do Loss
Dimensions Matter?” IMF Working Paper, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
———, Maria Moreno Badia, and Priscilla Toffano. Forthcoming. “A Primer on the Macro-Fiscal Impact of Natural
Disasters.” IMF Working Paper, International Monetary
Fund, Washington, DC.
Graff Zivin, J. S., Solomon M. Hsiang, and Matthew J. Neidell.
2015. “Temperature and Human Capital in the Short- and
Long-Run.” NBER Working Paper 21157, National Bureau
of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Graff Zivin, J. S., and Matthew J. Neidell. 2014. “Temperature and the Allocation of Time: Implications for Climate
Change.” Journal of Labor Economics 32 (1): 1–26.
Gray, Clark L., and Valerie Mueller. 2012a. “Drought and
Population Mobility in Rural Ethiopia.” World Development
40 (1): 134–45.

180

———. 2012b. “Natural Disasters and Population Mobility in
Bangladesh.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
109 (16): 6000–05.
Guha-Sapir, Debarati, Regina Below, and Philippe Hoyois. 2015.
“EM-DAT: The CRED/OFDA International Disaster Database.” Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
www​​.emdat​​.be.
Guo, Y., A. Gasparrini, B. Armstrong, S. Li, B. Tawatsupa, A.
Tobias, E. Lavigne, M. de Sousa Zanotti Stagliorio Coelho,
M. Leone, X. Pan, S. Tong, L. Tian, H. Kim, M. Hashizume,
Y. Honda, YL Guo, CF Wu, K. Punnasiri, SM Yi, P. Michelozzi, PH Saldiva, and G. Williams. 2014. “Global Variation
in the Effects of Ambient Temperature on Mortality: A
Systematic Evaluation.” Epidemiology 25 (6): 781–89.
Hallegatte, Stéphane. 2009. “Strategies to Adapt to an Uncertain Climate Change.” Global Environmental Change 19
(2): 240–47.
———, Mook Bangalore, Laura Bonzanigo, Marianne Fay,
Tamaro Kane, Ulf Narloch, Julie Rozenberg, David Treguer,
and Adrien Vogt-Schilb. 2016. “Shock Waves: Managing the
Impacts of Climate Change on Poverty.” Climate Change and
Development Series. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Hallegatte, Stéphane, Jean-Charles Hourcade, Patrice Dumas.
2007. “Why Economic Dynamics Matter in Assessing
Climate Change Damages: Illustration on Extreme Events.”
Ecological Economics 62: 330–40.
Hallegatte, Stéphane, Franck Lecocq, and Christian de Perthuis.
2011. “Designing Climate Change Adaptation Policies: An
Economic Framework.” Policy Research Working Paper 5568,
World Bank, Washington, DC.
Hallegatte, Stéphane, and Julie Rozenberg. 2017. “Climate Change
through a Poverty Lens.” Nature Climate Change 4: 250–56.
Hauer, Mathew E., Jason M. Evans, and Deepak R. Mishra.
2016. “Millions Projected to Be at Risk from Sea-Level
Rise in the Continental United States.” Nature Climate
Change 6: 691–95.
Haug, Gerald H., Detlef Günther, Larry C. Peterson, Daniel M.
Sigman, Konrad A. Hughen, and Beat Aeschlimann. 2003.
“Climate and the Collapse of Maya Civilization.” Science 299
(5613): 1731–35.
Heal, Geoffrey, and Jisung Park. 2016. “Temperature Stress
and the Direct Impact of Climate Change: A Review of an
Emerging Literature.” Review of Environmental Economics and
Policy 10 (2): 347–62.
Hong, Harrison, Frank Li, and Jiangmin Xu. 2016. “Climate
Risks and Market Efficiency.” NBER Working Paper 22890,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Hope, Chris. 2011. “The PAGE09 Integrated Assessment Model:
A Technical Description.” Cambridge Judge Business School
Working Papers 4/11.
Hornbeck, Richard. 2012. “The Enduring Impact of the
American Dust Bowl: Short- and Long-Run Adjustments to
Environmental Catastrophe.” American Economic Review 102
(4): 1477–507.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

———, and Suresh Naidu. 2014. “When the Levee Breaks:
Black Migration and Economic Development in the American South.” American Economic Review 104 (3): 963–90.
Hsiang, Solomon M. 2016. “Climate Econometrics.” Annual
Review of Resource Economics 8: 43–75.
———, and Amir Jina. 2014. “The Causal Effect of Environmental Catastrophe on Long-Run Economic Growth: Evidence from 6,700 Cyclones.” NBER Working Paper 20352,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Hsiang, Solomon M., and Daiju Narita. 2012. “Adaptation
to Cyclone Risk: Evidence from the Global Cross-Section.”
Climate Change Economics 3 (2).
Hulten, Charles R. 1996. “Infrastructure Capital and Economic
Growth: How Well You Use It May Be More Important
Than How Much You Have.” NBER Working Paper 5847,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Ilzetzki, Ethan, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff.
2008. “Exchange Rate Arrangements Entering the 21st Century:
Which Anchor Will Hold?” NBER Working Paper 23134,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2013.
“Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis.” Summary for Policymakers. Contribution of Working Group I to
the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change. Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2014. “Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation,
and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects.”
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2015. “Macroeconomic
Developments and Prospects in Low-Income Developing
Countries.” Policy Paper, Washington, DC.
———. 2016a. “Enhancing Resilience to Natural Disasters
in Sub-Saharan Africa.” In Regional Economic Outlook:
Sub-Saharan Africa. Washington DC, October.
———. 2016b. “Small States’ Resilience to Natural Disasters and Climate Change: Role for the IMF.” Board Paper,
Washington, DC.
———. 2017. “Seychelles: Climate Change Policy Assessment.”
IMF Country Report 17/162, Washington, DC.
Jennings, Steve. 2011. “Time’s Bitter Flood: Trends in the Number of Reported Natural Disasters.” Oxfam Policy and Practice:
Climate Change and Resilience 7 (1): 115–47.
Jordà, Òscar. 2005. “Estimation and Inference of Impulse
Responses by Local Projections.” American Economic Review
95 (1): 161–82.
Kahn, Matthew. 2005. “The Death Toll from Natural Disasters:
The Role of Income, Geography and Institutions.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 87 (2): 271–84.
Karlan, Dean S., Robert Osei, Isaac Osei-Akoto, and Christopher Udry. 2014. “Agricultural Decisions after Relaxing

Credit and Risk Constraints.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
129 (2): 597–652.
Kelley, Colin P., Shahrzad Mohtadi, Mark A. Cane, Richard
Seager, and Yochanan Kushnir. 2015. “Climate Change in
the Fertile Crescent and Implications of the Recent Syrian
Drought.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112
(11): 3241–46.
Kim, Nam Kyu. 2014. “Revisiting Economic Shocks and
Coups.” Journal of Conflict Resolution 60: 3–31.
Klein Goldewijk, Kees, Arthur Beusen, Jonathan Doelman, and
Elke Stehfest. 2016. “New Anthropogenic Land Use Estimates
for the Holocene; HYDE 3.2.” Earth System Science Data.
Knapp, Kenneth, Scott Applequist, Howard Diamond, James
Kossin, Michael Kruk, and Carl Schreck. 2010. NCDC
International Best Track Archive for Climate Stewardship
(IBTrACS) Project, Version 3. Revision 09. NOAA, National
Centers for Environmental Information.
Knapp, Kenneth, Michael Kruk, David Levinson, Howard Diamond, and Charles Neumann. 2010. “The International Best
Track Archive for Climate Stewardship (IBTrACS): Unifying
Tropical Cyclone Best Track Data.” Bulletin of the American
Meteorological Society 91: 363–76.
Knutson, Thomas, John McBride, Johnny Chan, Kerry Emanuel, Greg Holland, Chris Landsea, Isaac Held, James Kossin,
A. Srivastava, and Masato Sugi. 2010. “Tropical Cyclones and
Climate Change.” Nature Geoscience 3: 157–63.
Knutson, Thomas, and Robert Tuleya. 2004. “Impact of
CO2-Induced Warming on Simulated Hurricane Intensity
and Precipitation: Sensitivity to the Choice of Climate
Model and Convective Parameterization.” Journal of Climate
17: 3477–95.
Kudamatsu, Masayuki, Torsten Persson, and David Strömberg. 2012.
“Weather and Infant Mortality in Africa.” CEPR Discussion
Paper 9222, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.
Landsea, Christopher. 2004. “Hurricane FAQ: Why Do Tropical
Cyclones Require 80°F (26.5°C) Ocean Temperatures to
Form?” NOAA, Hurricane Research Division of the Atlantic
Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory, Miami, FL.
http://​www​​.aoml​​.noaa​​.gov/​​hrd/​​tcfaq/​​A16​​.html.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2017. “International Financial Integration in the Aftermath of the Global
Financial Crisis.” IMF Working Paper 17/115, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Lanzafame, Matteo. 2014. “Temperature, Rainfall, and Economic Growth in Africa.” Empirical Economics 46 (1): 1–18.
Lee, Minsoo, Mai Lin Villaruel, and Raymond Gaspar. 2016.
“Effects of Temperature Shocks on Economic Growth and
Welfare in Asia.” ADB Economics Working Paper 501, Asian
Development Bank, Mandaluyong City, Philippines.
Lee, Tien Ming, Ezra M. Markowitz, Peter D. Howe, Chia-Ying
Ko, and Anthony A. Leiserowitz. 2015. “Predictors of Public
Climate Change Awareness and Risk Perception around the
World.” Nature Climate Change 5: 1014–20.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

181

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Lemoine, Derek. 2017. “Expect above Average Temperatures:
Identifying the Economic Impact of Climate Change.”
NBER Working Paper 23549, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Lloyd’s. 2012. Global Underinsurance Report. London:
October 2012.
Lobell, David B., Wolfram Schlenker, and Justin Costa-Roberts.
2011. “Climate Trends and Global Crop Production since
1980.” Science 333 (6042): 616–20.
Marchiori, Luca, Jean-Francois Maystadt, and Ingmar Schumacher. 2012. “The Impact of Weather Anomalies on
Migration in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 63 (3): 355–74.
Marcott, Shaun A., Jeremy D. Shakun, Peter U. Clark, and
Alan C. Mix. 2013. “A Reconstruction of Regional and
Global Temperature for the Past 11,300 Years.” Science 339
(6124): 1198–201.
Margulis, Sergio, and Urvashi Narain. 2010. The Costs to Developing Countries of Adapting to Climate Change: New Methods
and Estimates–The Global Report of the Economics of Adaptation to Climate Change Study. Washington: World Bank.
Matsuura, Kenji, and Cort J. Willmott. 2007. “Terrestrial Air
Temperature: 1900–2006 Gridded Monthly Time Series (Version 1.01) 2009.” http://​climate​​.geog​​.udel​​.edu/​​~climate/​​html​​
_pages/​​Global2​​_Ts​​_2009/​​README​​.global​​_t​​_ts​​_2009​​.html.
McDermott, Thomas K. J., Frank Barry, and Richard S. J. Tol.
2013. “Disasters and Development: Natural Disasters, Credit
Constraints, and Economic Growth.” Oxford Economic Papers
66 (3): 750–73.
Mueller, Valerie, Clark Gray, and Katrina Kosec. 2014. “Heat
Stress Increases Long-Term Human Migration in Rural Pakistan.” Nature Climate Change 4: 182–85.
Munshi, Kaivan. 2003. “Networks in the Modern Economy:
Mexican Migrants in the US Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2): 549–99.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
2017a. “Climate at a Glance: Global Time Series.” National
Centers for Environmental Information, NOAA, Department of
Commerce, Washington, DC. http://​​www​​.ncdc​​.noaa​​.gov/​​cag/​​.
———. 2017b. “Tropical Cyclone Climatology.” National Hurricane Center, NOAA, Department of Commerce, Washington, DC. http://​​www​​.nhc​​.noaa​​.gov/​​climo/​​.
Ngai, L. Rachel, and Christopher A. Pissarides. 2007. “Structural Change in a Multi-Sector Model of Growth.” American
Economic Review 97 (1): 429–43.
Nordhaus, William D. 2010. “Economic Aspects of Global
Warming in a Post-Copenhagen Environment.” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 107 (26): 11721–26.
Nordhaus, William D., and Andrew Moffat. 2017. “A Survey of
Global Impacts of Climate Change: Replication, Survey Methods and a Statistical Analysis.” NBER Working Paper 23646,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Nordhaus, William D., and Paul Sztorc. 2013. “DICE 2013R:
Introduction and User’s Manual.” www​​.dicemodel​​.net.

182

Noy, Ilan. 2009. “The Macroeconomic Consequences of Disasters.” Journal of Development Economics 88 (2): 221–31.
Nunn, Nathan. 2008. “The Long-Term Effects of Africa’s Slave
Trades.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (1): 139–76.
———. 2014. “Historical Development.” In Handbook of
Economic Growth (2), edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven
Durlauf, 347–402. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). 2015a. Climate Change Risks and Adaptation: Linking Policy and Economics. Paris: OECD Publishing.
———. 2015b. “Climate Finance in 2013–14 and the USD
100 Billion Goal.” A report by the OECD in collaboration
with Climate Policy Initiative, Paris.
Özden, Çağlar, Christopher Parsons, Maurice Schiff, and Terrie
L. Walmsley. 2011. “Where on Earth Is Everybody? The
Evolution of Global Bilateral Migration, 1960–2000.” World
Bank Economic Review 25 (1): 12–56.
Park, Jisung. 2016. “Will We Adapt? Temperature Shocks,
Labor Productivity, and Adaptation to Climate Change
in the United States.” Unpublished. Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA.
———. 2017. “Heat Stress and Human Capital Production.”
Unpublished, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
Parry, Ian W. H., Ruud de Mooij, and Michael Keen. 2012.
Fiscal Policy to Mitigate Climate Change: A Guide for Policymakers. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Parry, Ian W. H., Adele Morris, and Roberton Williams, editors.
2015. Implementing a US Carbon Tax: Challenges and Debates.
London: Routledge.
Parry, Ian W. H., Victor Mylonas, and Nate Vernon. 2017.
“Reforming Energy Policy in India: Assessing the Options.”
IMF Working Paper 17/103, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Parry, Ian W. H., Baoping Shang, Philippe Wingender, Nate
Vernon, and Tarun Narasimhan. 2016. “Climate Mitigation
in China: Which Policies Are Most Effective?” IMF Working
Paper 16/148, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Peng, Wei, and Alan Feng. Forthcoming. “Underreacting to Climate
Shocks: Evidence from Global Stock Markets.”
Porter, Catherine, and Emily White. 2016. “Potential for
Application of a Probabilistic Catastrophe Risk Modelling
Framework to Poverty Outcomes: General Form Vulnerability
Functions Relating Household Poverty Outcomes to Hazard
Intensity in Ethiopia.” Policy Research Working Paper 7717,
World Bank, Washington, DC.
Pritchett, Lant. 2000. “The Tyranny of Concepts: CUDIE
(Cumulated, Depreciated, Investment Effort) Is Not Capital.”
Journal of Economic Growth 5 (4): 361–84.
Quinn, Dennis P. 1997. “The Correlates of Change in International Financial Regulation.” American Political Science Review
91 (3): 531–51.
———, and A. Maria Toyoda. 2008. “Does Capital Account
Liberalization Lead to Growth?” Review of Financial Studies
21 (3): 1403–49.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

Raddatz, Claudio. 2009. “The Wrath of God: Macroeconomic
Costs of Natural Disasters.” Policy Research Working Paper
5039, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Ramcharan, Rodney. 2009. “Does the Exchange Rate Regime
Matter for Real Shocks? Evidence from Windstorms and Earthquakes.” Journal of International Economics 73 (1): 31–47.
Reinhart, Carmen, and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2004. “The Modern
History of Exchange Rate Arrangements: A Reinterpretation.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (1): 1–48.
Roston, Eric, and Blacki Migliozzi. 2015. “What’s Really Warming the World?” Bloomberg Business Week, June 24.
Schlenker, Wolfram, and David B. Lobell. 2010. “Robust
Negative Impacts of Climate Change on African Agriculture.”
Environmental Research Letters 5 (1).
Schlenker, Wolfram, and Michael J. Roberts. 2009. “Nonlinear
Temperature Effects Indicate Severe Damages to US Crop
Yields under Climate Change.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 106 (37): 15594–98.
Schmidt-Traub, Guido. 2015. “Investment Needs to Achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals.” SDSN Working Paper,
United Nations, New York.
Seppänen, Olli, William J. Fisk, and David Faulkner. 2003.
“Cost Benefit Analysis of the Night-Time Ventilative Cooling in Office Building.” Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA.
Seppänen, Olli, William J. Fisk, and Q. H. Lei. 2006. “Room
Temperature and Productivity in Office Work.” LBNL-60952.
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA.
Shakun, Jeremy D., Peter U. Clark, Feng He, Shaun A. Marcott,
Alan C. Mix, Zhengyu Liu, Bette Otto-Bliesner, Andreas
Schmittner, and Edouard Bard. 2012. “Global Warming Preceded by Increasing Carbon Dioxide Concentrations during
the Last Deglaciation.” Nature 484: 49–54.
Somanathan, E., Rohini Somanathan, Anant Sudarshan, and
Meenu Tewari. 2017. “The Impact of Temperature on Productivity and Labor Supply: Evidence from Indian Manufacturing.” Unpublished.
Stern, Nicholas Herbert. 2007. The Economics of Climate Change:
The Stern Review. Cambridge University Press.
———. 2015. Why Are We Waiting? The Logic, Urgency,
and Promise of Tackling Climate Change. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
———, and Joseph Stiglitz. 2017. “Report of
the High-Level Commission on Carbon Pricing.” https://​static1​​.squarespace​​.com/​​static/​​
54ff9c5ce4b0a53decccfb4c/​​t/​​59244eed17bffc0ac256cf16/​​
1495551740633/​​CarbonPricing​​_Final​​_May29​​.pdf.
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. 2007. “Why Has
US Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?” Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking 39 (S1): 3–33.
Strobl, Eric. 2012. “The Economic Growth Impact of Natural
Disasters in Developing Countries: Evidence from Hurricane

Strikes in the Central American and Caribbean Regions.”
Journal of Development Economics 97 (1): 130–41.
Teulings, Coen N., and Nikolay Zubanov. 2014. “Is Economic
Recovery a Myth? Robust Estimation of Impulse Responses.”
Journal of Applied Econometrics 29 (3): 497–514.
Thomas, Vinod, and Ramon Lopez. 2015. “Global Increase in
Climate-Related Disasters.” ADB Economics Working Paper
466, Asian Development Bank, Manila.
Timmer, Marcel P., Gaaitzen de Vries, and Klaas de Vries. 2015.
“Patterns of Structural Change in Developing Countries.” In
Routledge Handbook of Industry and Development, edited by
John Weiss and Michael Tribe, 65–83. London: Routledge.
Tol, Richard S. 2009. “The Economic Effects of Climate
Change.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 23 (2): 29–51.
———. 2014. “Correction and Update: The Economic Effects
of Climate Change.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 28
(November): 221–26.
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). 2016. The
Adaptation Finance Gap Report 2016. United National Environment Programme (UNEP), Nairobi, Kenya.
Usery, E. Lynn, Jinmu Choi, and Michael P. Finn. 2007.
“Modeling Sea-Level Rise Effects on Population Using Global
Elevation and Land-Cover Data.” US Geological Survey, Center of Excellence for Geospatial Information Science (CEGIS)
Working Paper.
———. 2009. “Modeling Sea-Level Rise and Surge in Low-Lying
Urban Areas Using Spatial Data, Geographic Information
Systems, and Animation Methods.” In Geospatial Techniques in
Urban Hazard and Disaster Analysis, edited by Pamela Showalter and Yongmei Lu, 11–30. Dordrecht: Springer.
Von Peter, Goetz, Sebastian V. Dahlen, and Sweta Saxena. 2012.
“Unmitigated Disasters? New Evidence on the Macroeconomic Cost of Natural Catastrophes.” BIS Working Paper
394, Bank for International Settlements, Basel.
Wang, Sun Ling, Eldon Ball, Richard Nehring, Ryan Williams,
and Truong Chau. 2017. “Impacts of Climate Change and
Extreme Weather on US Agricultural Productivity.” NBER
Working Paper 23533, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Wargocki, Pawel, and David P. Wyon. 2007. “The Effects of
Moderately Raised Classroom Temperatures and Classroom
Ventilation Rate on the Performance of Schoolwork by
Children (RP-1257).” HVAC&R Research 13 (2): 193–220.
Weitzman, Martin. 2011. “Fat-Tailed Uncertainty in the Economics of Catastrophic Climate Change.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 5 (2): 275–92.
World Bank. 2013. Turn Down the Heat: Climate Extremes, Regional
Impacts, and the Case for Resilience. A report for the World Bank
by the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research and
Climate Analytics. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———, Ecofys, Vivid Economics. 2016. State and Trends of
Carbon Pricing 2016. Washington, DC: World Bank.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

183

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER

4

CROSS-BORDER IMPACTS OF FISCAL POLICY: STILL RELEVANT?

Positive cross-country spillovers from collective fiscal
action by the world’s largest economies helped speed the
recovery from the global financial crisis nearly a decade
ago. But do fiscal spillovers still matter today? The answer
is yes—but the extent depends on circumstances in both
the countries that generate fiscal shocks and in those that
are recipients of the shocks. This chapter combines new
empirical research and model-based simulations to show
that fiscal spillovers tend to be low when a fiscal shock
originates from a country without output gaps, but the
impact intensifies when a source or recipient country is in
recession and/or benefiting from accommodative monetary policy—which suggests that spillovers are large when
domestic multipliers are also large. The chapter also finds
that spillovers from government spending shocks are larger
than those associated with tax shocks, that the transmission of fiscal shocks may be stronger among countries with
fixed exchange rates, and that fiscal spillovers impact the
external positions of source and recipient countries alike.
Model-based simulations suggest that the cross-border
effects of budget-neutral fiscal reforms are generally modest, though large reforms can trigger spillovers, especially if
they affect cross-border investment decisions. Overall, this
evidence draws attention to the cross-border repercussions
of corporate tax reform in the United States, for example,
or of an increase in public investment in Germany.

Introduction
What is the potential for fiscal policy to affect
macroeconomic outcomes in other economies through
cross-border spillovers? This question has been at the
center of the policy debate, especially in the aftermath
of the global financial crisis, when many countries
experienced persistent economic slack, and monetary
policy interest rates approached the effective lower
bound. Fiscal stimulus was then advocated widely,
especially in major economies with sufficient fiscal
The authors of this chapter are Patrick Blagrave, Giang Ho, Ksenia
Koloskova, and Esteban Vesperoni (lead author), with support from
Sung Eun Jung and contributions from Jared Bebee, Ben Hunt,
Adina Popescu, and Ippei Shibata.

space. This was not least because excess capacity and
low interest rates would help limit crowding out
of private spending and the expected positive spillovers would make collective efforts to boost activity
more effective.
More recently, the global effects of fiscal policy have
been discussed amid possible changes in the macroeconomic policy mix in Japan and the United States.
Debate is also ongoing about the role of fiscal policies
in addressing excess external imbalances, including whether euro area countries with excess current
account surpluses should raise fiscal spending, which
could also support growth in the currency union.
Recent improvements in economic conditions in
many countries and their implications for monetary
policy raise questions about the size of potential
spillovers from fiscal stimulus today. Cyclical positions
have improved across the board over the past few years,
although with differences across countries (Figure 4.1).
For example, the United States is operating at close to
full employment and, as a result, the Federal Reserve
has begun to normalize monetary policy conditions.
At the same time, although euro area economies
and Japan are experiencing an encouraging cyclical
recovery, output gaps remain negative in many of these
countries and core inflation is stubbornly low, prompting monetary authorities to commit to accommodative policies for an extended period. As the chapter
discusses, cyclical conditions and the associated ability
or willingness of monetary policy to act, both in countries emitting and receiving the fiscal shock, are key
determinants of the magnitude of its impact.1 Considerations regarding fiscal space in source countries are
also relevant—if term premiums increase and financial
conditions tighten following a fiscal stimulus, spillovers
could be smaller.
Against this backdrop, the chapter aims to answer
the following questions:

1Throughout the chapter, countries from which fiscal shocks
originate are referred to as “source” or “shock-emitting”; countries affected by these shocks are referred to as “recipient” or
“shock-receiving.”

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

185

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 4.1. Output Gap in Selected Countries
(Percent)

2009

2017

1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
–6

IDN

CHN

ZAF

BRA
IND

MEX
RUS

TUR

ARG

ESP

AUS

FRA
KOR

GBR

DEU

CAN
ITA

–8

JPN
USA

–7

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) country codes.

•• Are fiscal spillovers large from a global or regional
perspective? How do they depend on the fiscal
instruments involved (for example, government
spending or taxes)? How do they depend on fiscal
space in source countries?
•• To what extent does the size of fiscal spillovers
depend on cyclical and monetary policy conditions,
in both source and recipient countries?
•• How do fiscal spillovers depend on exchange
rate regimes?
•• What is the impact of fiscal shocks on external
positions and exchange rates in source and recipient countries?
•• Do fiscal reforms generate spillovers, even if the
reforms are budget neutral?
The chapter sheds light on these issues by looking at
the implications of fiscal policy changes in some major
advanced economies for activity across a large group
of advanced and emerging market economies. The
empirical analysis is based on a newly constructed data
set of government spending and tax revenue shocks
for five systemic economies between the first quarter
of 2000 and the second quarter of 2016, identified
using the structural vector autoregression method186

ology of Blanchard and Perotti (2002). Information
from the five source-country shocks is combined using
the strength of trade links with a range of advanced
and emerging market recipient countries to assess
global spillovers.
To analyze the role that economic slack, constraints
on monetary policy, and exchange rate regimes play in
transmission, the chapter uses an econometric framework that can flexibly test for the presence of nonlinear
effects. Model-based simulations then help to illustrate
the complex cross-border transmission channels of
fiscal shocks. This approach offers insights into potential changes in the external positions of source and
recipient countries, as well as the dynamic behavior of
key macroeconomic variables, and elucidates spillovers
from different types of fiscal reforms.
The chapter’s findings add to the existing empirical
literature on fiscal spillovers by expanding the scope
of the analysis. Previous empirical studies focus on a
relatively small sample of recipient countries—often
those of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) or euro area (Beetsma
and Giuliodori 2004; Beetsma, Klaassen, and Wieland
2006; Auerbach and Gorodnichenko 2013; Nicar
2015; Blanchard, Erceg, and Lindé 2016; Goujard
2017; Poghosyan 2017), and several studies consider
only one fiscal instrument (government spending) and/
or only fiscal consolidation episodes. The chapter also
adds to the literature, extending the analysis of economic slack, monetary policy accommodation, and the
role of exchange rate regimes in determining spillovers
from fiscal shocks.
The chapter suggests that fiscal spillovers still matter,
but their size depends on the type of fiscal action and
on economic circumstances in both source and recipient countries:
•• Fiscal spillovers are larger for spending shocks. On
average, a 1 percent of GDP fiscal stimulus in a
major advanced economy can raise output in recipient countries by 0.08 percent over the first year.
But spillovers are larger for government spending
shocks than for tax shocks, consistent with the literature that points to higher domestic multipliers for
spending shocks—output in recipients can increase
by 0.15 percent following a spending hike, versus
0.05 percent after a tax cut. Model simulations
reinforce this message and provide more granular
evidence—for example, changes in public investment tend to have larger cross-border effects than
changes in public consumption.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 4

•• Relatively weak cyclical positions imply larger spillovers.
Although modest in normal times, spillovers are
larger when cyclical conditions are weak, likely due
to the reduced crowding-out effects of public spending on private sector activity.
•• Monetary policy constraints also increase spillovers.
When monetary policy in either source or recipient
countries does not counteract fiscal shocks—for
example, because the effective lower bound is
binding—spillovers are much larger than during
normal times.
•• Currency pegs between source and recipient countries may amplify spillovers. There is some evidence
suggesting that fiscal shocks tend to have larger spillovers on recipient countries with currencies pegged
to the source country’s currency than on those with
flexible exchange rates.
•• Fiscal policy can change external positions in source
and recipient countries. Trade balances deteriorate in
source countries following a fiscal expansion, with
a consequent improvement in recipients’ external positions.
•• An increase in term premiums may dampen spillovers.
If fiscal stimulus at the source increases the term
premium—for instance, because of concerns about
debt sustainability—spillovers are somewhat lower
compared with a constant term premium scenario.
•• Under some circumstances, fiscal reforms come
with spillovers as well. Most budget-neutral fiscal
reforms have limited cross-border effects, although
large reforms can generate significant spillovers.
For example, a reform that substantially reduces
corporate income tax rates and is offset by higher
consumption taxes in major economies can have
repercussions in the rest of the world, including
through higher global interest rates and cross-border
reallocation of investment and profits.
These results point to several important policy
lessons that are relevant now. Although fiscal space is
currently more limited, and improved cyclical conditions in many countries mean that spillovers from fiscal policy are likely to be lower than during the global
financial crisis, the analysis suggests that fiscal stimulus
in major economies can nonetheless be important in
lifting economic activity abroad, although not everywhere. For example, given the cyclical position and
gradually less accommodative monetary policy conditions in the United States, a US fiscal stimulus would
likely have relatively modest cross-border spillovers,

Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant?

especially if stimulus takes the form of tax policy measures. In the euro area—where there is fiscal space in
some countries—stimulus could have larger spillovers.
This is in the context of prospects for continued monetary policy accommodation and still-significant slack in
some recipient countries.
The impact on external imbalances would also
depend on the source of fiscal stimulus, as stimulus
in the United States is likely to increase imbalances,
whereas stimulus in some surplus euro area countries could reduce them. Where countries are considering significant reductions in corporate income
tax rates, the analysis suggests associated changes in
investment-location and profit-reporting decisions
by multinational corporations could have significant
negative spillovers on activity and the fiscal position of
nonreforming countries.

Spillovers from Fiscal Policy—A
Conceptual Framework
The cross-border impact of fiscal policy changes
in a given country depends on their initial domestic
effects and the transmission mechanisms of shocks.
This means that factors affecting the source’s domestic
fiscal multiplier are relevant for determining spillovers
on recipient countries. The fiscal shock is propagated
through different channels—primarily associated with
trade links—with the final impact also depending on
the economic and policy conditions in the recipient
countries (Figure 4.2). This section provides a brief
overview of the domestic impact of fiscal shocks, outlines their possible transmission channels, and discusses
the factors affecting transmission.

Domestic Impact of a Fiscal Shock
A large body of literature on domestic fiscal multipliers suggests that cyclical and policy conditions play
a role in the response of a domestic economy to fiscal
shocks. In general, multiplier estimates vary significantly across countries, sample periods, and methodologies. While a comprehensive summary is beyond
the scope of this chapter (see, for example, Batini
and others 2014), dynamic stochastic general equilibrium and structural vector autoregression models
developed since the early 1990s suggest that the size
of multipliers tends to be modest (between zero and
one over the first year) in “normal times”—generally
understood as circumstances in which the economy
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

187

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 4.2. The Transmission of a Fiscal Shock

Exchange Rate Regime
Cyclical Position

Cyclical Position

Monetary Policy

Monetary Policy

Transmission
Channels
Trade
• Expenditure shifting
• Expenditure switching

SOURCE
Fiscal Shock

RECIPIENT
• Interest rates
• Exchange rates

• Term premium
• Equity prices

Financial
Source: IMF staff compilation.

does not have a significant output gap—and depends
on a number of structural characteristics, including a
country’s trade openness, exchange rate regime, labor
market rigidities, and size of public debt.2 Outside
normal times, multipliers can vary with the state of the
business cycle (generally larger in a downturn than in
an expansion, although the empirical evidence is not
conclusive) or the degree of monetary accommodation
(larger when monetary policy is unresponsive, such as
at the effective lower bound).3 All else equal, a larger
domestic multiplier should be associated with greater
cross-border spillovers.
The composition of the fiscal intervention—
whether it is based on government spending or
2For example, see Cole and Ohanian (2004); Kirchner, Cimadomo, and Hauptmeier (2010); Corsetti, Meier, and Müller (2012);
Gorodnichenko, Mendoza, and Tesar (2012); Born, Juessen,
and Müller (2013); and Ilzetzki, Mendoza, and Vegh (2013). A
multiplier of one would suggest that a change in the fiscal balance
translates—dollar for dollar—into a similar change in GDP.
3For example, see Erceg and Lindé (2010); Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011); Eggertsson (2011); Woodford (2011);
Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012a, 2012b); Owyang, Ramey, and
Zubairy (2013); Nakamura and Steinsson (2014); Riera-Crichton,
Vegh, and Vuletin (2015); Blanchard, Erceg, and Lindé (2016); and
Canzoneri and others (2016). However, Ramey and Zubairy (forthcoming) found little evidence of state dependence of the government
spending multiplier based on historical data from the United States.

188

revenue measures—also influences the size of the
domestic multiplier. Many studies have found that, for
advanced economies, short-term spending multipliers
tend to be larger than revenue multipliers (for example, see a survey in Mineshima, Poplawski-Ribeiro,
and Weber 2014). This has been explained using
traditional Keynesian theory—for example, while an
additional dollar of government spending contributes directly to higher aggregate demand, a dollar of
tax cuts can be either spent or saved by firms and/
or households (that is, the marginal propensity to
consume can be less than one). Recent empirical evidence using the narrative approach has found somewhat larger tax multipliers than spending multipliers,
although narrative-based evidence on the latter is primarily limited to defense-related spending.4 Yet other
studies suggest that the relative magnitude of the
4The narrative method, pioneered by Romer and Romer (2010),
makes use of narrative records, such as budget documents and
speeches, to identify the size, timing, and principal motivation for
fiscal actions. The Romer and Romer (2010) data set also divides fiscal policy changes into those made for reasons related to prospective
economic conditions and discretionary actions (for example, actions
aimed at reducing public debt), thereby allowing for a causal analysis
of the impact of fiscal policy on output. See also Ramey (2011);
Cloyne (2013); Mertens and Ravn (2013); and Guajardo, Leigh, and
Pescatori (2014).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 4

spending and revenue multipliers may differ between
consolidation and expansion episodes and among
different degrees of monetary accommodation.5

Channels of Cross-Border Transmission
In standard open-economy macroeconomic models,
a fiscal shock is transmitted abroad primarily through
the trade channel, which consists of two effects:6
•• Expenditure shifting (sometimes referred to as
“leakages”) refers to the direct impact of a fiscal policy change on the source country’s import
demand through changes in domestic consumption
and investment, which affects trading partners.
Here, the marginal propensity to import by both
the public and private sectors plays a key role—if
most spending changes are in nontradable sectors
and do not translate into a higher or lower level of
imports, spillovers from expenditure shifting may be
smaller. Larger and more open economies tend to
import more, suggesting that fiscal policy changes in
these countries will have larger spillovers on others
through the expenditure shifting channel.
•• Expenditure switching refers to the impact of a
fiscal shock operating through changes in the
real exchange rate, which can trigger substitution
between domestic and foreign goods consumption.
For example, in a Mundell-Fleming-Dornbusch
framework, fiscal expansion puts upward pressure on
interest rates, the nominal exchange rate appreciates
in the source country, and domestic prices increase.7
The resulting real appreciation boosts import
demand as foreign goods become cheaper. This
effect will be more significant, especially in the short
term, when the nominal exchange rate is fully flexible; where nominal exchange rates are fixed, relative
price—and hence real exchange rate—adjustments
can take longer. Either way, expenditure switching
effects imply that a fiscal shock can have nontrivial
cross-border spillovers, even if its domestic impact
is muted, because the boost to import demand can
occur without an increase in domestic income.
In addition to the trade channel, the response of
financial variables to a fiscal shock can trigger spillovers
5For

example, see Eggertsson (2011); and Erceg and Lindé (2013).
example, see Fleming (1962); Mundell (1963); Dornbusch
(1976); and Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995).
7Notice that other frameworks can deliver different exchange rate
predictions (see Obstfeld and Rogoff 1995).
6For

Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant?

through changes in global financial conditions. A fiscal
policy change in a large economy can impact global
interest rates, exchange rates, and the slope of the
yield curve—the latter stemming from any perceived
or actual impact of the policy change on long-term
fiscal sustainability in the source country. The financial
channel can work in the opposite direction to the trade
channel. For example, the higher interest rates and
exchange rate appreciation associated with an expansionary fiscal shock in the source country can increase
the cost of foreign currency borrowing and worsen
the balance sheets of corporations and households in
recipient countries if there are currency mismatches,
generating negative spillovers. Equity prices may also
adjust, with cross-border repercussions.
Overall, the relative strength of each transmission
channel will depend on the extent of trade and financial linkages between the source and recipient countries. Thus, the net spillover impact of a fiscal shock is
an empirical question.

Factors Affecting the Transmission
Like the domestic fiscal multiplier, cross-border
spillovers from fiscal actions tend to vary with economic circumstances. Two factors play particularly
important roles:
•• Cyclical position: The domestic multiplier—and
hence spillovers through expenditure shifting—
may be larger when the source country has more
economic slack. For example, a fiscal stimulus that
boosts public employment would be more likely to
crowd out private employment when labor markets
are tight (Michaillat 2014), resulting in smaller
domestic and spillover impacts; the same logic
applies to the case of fiscal tightening. Another
possibility is that a fiscal stimulus relaxes borrowing constraints (which tend to be tighter during
a downturn), for example, by raising the value of
collateralizable assets along with demand, helping
to increase credit and investment (Canzoneri and
others 2016). Somewhat similarly, if the recipient
country is operating close to full capacity when an
external fiscal shock hits, greater demand in tradable
sectors may crowd out activity in the rest of the
economy, resulting in a more muted impact on
overall economic activity.
•• Monetary policy constraints: Whether monetary
policy accommodates the fiscal shock matters, and
it is relevant for both source and recipient countries.
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

189

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Under normal circumstances, monetary policy reacts
to counter the demand and price effects of a fiscal
shock. However, when monetary policy is stuck at
the effective lower bound, the domestic and spillover
effects can be greater. For example, if nominal
interest rates in the source country do not rise in
response to higher expected inflation following an
expansionary fiscal shock, real interest rates decline,
crowding in domestic demand and increasing the
multiplier (Blanchard, Erceg, and Lindé 2016).8 In
this case, the reduction in the real interest rate in
the source country may lead its real exchange rate to
depreciate, changing the direction of the expenditure
switching effect. In a recipient country, when at the
effective lower bound, monetary policy will do little
to dampen the effect of the external shock.
Aside from conjunctural factors, institutional or
structural features such as the exchange rate regime can
also affect the transmission of fiscal shocks and hence
the size of spillovers. On one hand, most theoretical
frameworks predict that lack of nominal exchange
rate flexibility delays real exchange rate adjustments
to a fiscal shock, dampening the expenditure switching effect and hence the size of spillovers. On the
other hand, currency pegs can strengthen expenditure shifting between the source and recipient—for
example, by reducing expected exchange rate volatility
and cross-border transaction costs, which is helpful
in forming trade relationships (Klein and Shambaugh
2006; Qureshi and Tsangarides 2010; Aglietta and
Brand 2013)—and potentially increase spillovers. This
may be particularly relevant in currency unions, as
long-standing economic and institutional integration
and the use of a common currency can strengthen
trade (Rose and van Wincoop 2001; Berger and Nitsch
2008). The exchange rate regime also matters for the
transmission of fiscal shocks through the financial
channel. For example, under flexible regimes, spillovers
from an expansionary fiscal shock can be dampened if
currency mismatches in balance sheets of households
and corporations in the recipient country make depreciations contractionary. Ultimately, which of these
considerations dominates is an empirical question.
8This insight works for both contractionary and expansionary
shocks. Low interest rates prevent the central bank from counteracting a contractionary shock by reducing rates further, while in the
case of an expansionary shock, it may be fully accommodated if the
central bank aims for a more accommodative stance than feasible; in
either case, spillovers are amplified.

190

Spillovers on Economic Activity:
Empirical Evidence
This section examines the relevance of fiscal spillovers in practice and how they vary with economic
circumstances. It does so by looking at a very broad
sample of source and recipient countries and analyzing
different types of shocks under both fiscal consolidations and expansions. It first describes the empirical
strategy used to estimate spillovers and then presents
the estimated impact on economic activity in recipient countries.

Empirical Strategy
The baseline approach jointly identifies government
spending and revenue shocks in five major advanced
economies—France, Germany, Japan, the United
Kingdom, and the United States—using the structural
vector autoregression methodology of Blanchard and
Perotti (2002).9 A key assumption is that discretionary fiscal policy does not respond contemporaneously
to unexpected changes in output, as it takes time for
policymakers to assess the output shock and make
spending and/or tax decisions, including passing and
implementing new legislation. The assumption is more
likely to hold in the short term, and therefore the
identification uses quarterly data.10
The shocks identified by this approach offer a sensible narrative of the fiscal policies adopted over the past
several decades. Comparison of structural shocks with
historical policy records (quantified using the narrative approach in the literature) shows that structural
shocks can broadly reflect major policy changes in
timing and order of magnitude. For example, for the
United States, the structural tax shocks capture tax cuts
enacted under the Ronald Reagan and George W. Bush
administrations as well as their subsequent expiration.
The same is true of tax hikes during the 1980s, which
9Although

spillovers from fiscal policy in China are potentially
important, data limitations prevent the inclusion of China as a
source country in the empirical analysis. Later in the chapter,
model-based simulations help shed light on the potential spillover
effects from China’s fiscal policy.
10Although the use of quarterly fiscal data comes with challenges,
it is instrumental to implementing the identification method used
by Blanchard and Perotti (2002). These data (in real terms and
seasonally adjusted) are used for shock identification only and for
major advanced economies with high-quality statistics. As discussed
later in the chapter, it is also reassuring that alternative identification
methods that do not rely on quarterly fiscal data yield similar results
for spillovers.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 4

Figure 4.3. Tracking Tax Shocks in the United States
(Percent of GDP)
Blanchard-Perotti method
1.0

Narrative method (Romer-Romer)

(1) Tax hikes to put social security
system on a sounder footing
(4) 1993 Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act

0.5

0.0

(3) 1986 Tax
Reform Act

–0.5

(6) Expiration of 2003 tax
relief

–1.0

(5) Bush tax cuts
(2) Reagan tax cuts

–1.5
1980

85

90

95

2000

05

10

were put in place following the Greenspan Commission’s recommendations to shore up financing of the
social security system (Figure 4.3).11
The structural shocks also have a statistically and
economically significant domestic impact. Consistent
with traditional Keynesian theory and previous empirical work that uses a similar methodology, estimates of
domestic multipliers using the structural shocks tend
to be larger for spending instruments (slightly above
one) than for tax instruments (slightly below one).
Some differences are seen in the size of domestic tax
multipliers across the five source countries, with the
multiplier of the United States being larger than that
of European peers or Japan, possibly reflecting different
tax structures and the specific tax instruments used
(Blagrave and others, forthcoming).
The spillover effects from the fiscal shocks are
estimated using the local projections method.12 The
econometric specification relates an economic outcome
in a recipient country, such as the level of output,
to a fiscal shock from the five source countries—
constructed by pooling together shocks from source
countries and weighting them by the strength of trade

12See

Blagrave and others (forthcoming) for more examples.
Jordà (2005).

links between the source and the recipient.13 The
baseline specification controls for factors that affect the
normal short-term dynamics of output in the recipient
country, such as past growth rates and external demand
developments. The specification is estimated using
quarterly data from the first quarter of 2000 through
the second quarter of 2016, and the sample of 55
advanced and emerging market economies represents
almost 85 percent of world output. Thus, the panel
estimation gives spillover estimates for an “average”
country in the sample.14 For the panel estimation, the
shocks are expressed as a share of recipient countries’
output to facilitate aggregation across sources. For ease
of interpretation of the economic magnitude, results
are presented with shocks normalized to an average
1 percent of GDP change in the fiscal position across
source countries (see details in Annex 4.2, which shows
how panel results are rescaled using relative GDP levels
and trade links).

15

Sources: Romer and Romer (2010); and IMF staff calculations.

11See

Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant?

Spillovers on Economic Activity
The results point to significant spillover effects from
fiscal policy, especially from government spending
shocks. Figure 4.4 shows the estimated response to
a foreign fiscal shock of an average recipient country’s output over eight quarters. A shock to the fiscal
balance—henceforth referred to as the overall fiscal
shock—is constructed as a shock to government spending minus a shock to tax revenues, such that a positive
shock implies a reduction in the source country’s fiscal
balance (or an increase in the deficit). An overall fiscal
shock would increase recipient output on impact,
reaching a peak around the third quarter after the
shock before starting to dissipate (Figure 4.4, panel
1). Estimations for specific fiscal instruments show
that spillovers from a government spending shock are
larger, more persistent, and more precisely estimated
13The use of trade links to weight the shock is instrumental to
obtaining country-specific external fiscal shocks, but it does not
preclude spillovers through channels other than trade given that the
estimates capture the overall response of recipient-country GDP
regardless of the channel of transmission. Combining shocks from
several source countries is important to use the variability emanating
from different sources, given that trade patterns differ. In particular, while some source countries—such as the United States—can
have a global impact, the impact of others is more regional; for
example, Germany’s and France’s trading partners are more concentrated in Europe.
14More details about the data and empirical methodology are
provided in Annexes 4.1 and 4.2, respectively, as well as in Blagrave
and others, forthcoming.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

191

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 4.4. Dynamic Responses of Recipient Countries’
Output to Fiscal Shocks
(Impact on output level, percent; quarters on x-axis)
0.2

1. Overall Fiscal Shock

0.1

0.0

–0.1
0
0.6

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

2. Spending Shock

0.4
0.2
0.0
–0.2
0

1

0.2

3. Tax Shock

0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
0

1

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: t = 0 is the quarter of the respective shocks. Solid lines denote point
estimates and dashed lines denote 90 percent conﬁdence bands. Shocks are
normalized to an average of 1 percent of GDP across source countries.

than those from a tax shock of equal size (Figure 4.4,
panels 2 and 3).15 This is consistent with the evidence
pointing to larger domestic spending multipliers
than domestic tax multipliers—as discussed earlier.
Data constraints prevent a more detailed empirical
15These effects are assumed to be symmetric during fiscal expansions and consolidations—the panel analysis cannot disentangle a
potential asymmetry from different policy actions.

192

examination of spillovers from specific spending or
tax instruments, such as government consumption
or investment—an issue assessed later in the chapter
through model-based simulations.
Spillovers are economically significant and in line
with earlier estimates. For example, a 1 percent of
GDP overall fiscal shock in an average major advanced
economy would raise output in the average recipient
country by about 0.08 percent over the first year. For
a government spending increase of the same magnitude, the average spillover impact in recipient countries
increases to 0.15 percent over the first year; for a tax
hike of similar size, output falls by about 0.05 percent
(Figure 4.5). As expected, spillovers from fiscal shocks
are substantially lower than domestic fiscal multipliers
in source countries, but still relevant.16 These are of the
same order of magnitude as those found in previous
work—for example, Beetsma, Klaassen, and Wieland
(2006)—although differences in country and time
samples as well as shock identification make a direct
comparison challenging.17 While the spillover estimates
in this section are averages across different economic and
policy conditions, subsequent analysis also shows that
there is a large difference between estimates in normal
times and those in times of economic slack, for example.
Further analysis of components of recipient-country
output corroborates the importance of trade for the
transmission of fiscal shocks (Figure 4.6), consistent
with the conceptual framework outlined above. In particular, a positive fiscal shock from abroad is estimated
to raise recipient-country bilateral exports to the source
countries. With higher export demand, firms expand
investment to build production capacity, generating a
second-round effect on recipient-country investment,
whereas the impact on consumption appears negligible.
The boost to exports and investment increases imports,
some of which come from source countries. With
bilateral imports rising by much less than bilateral
exports, however, the recipient’s trade balance with the
source countries improves following the fiscal shock.
16As discussed earlier, fiscal shocks in the chapter yield domestic
spending multipliers slightly above one and tax multipliers slightly
below one, on average, across the source countries.
17Beetsma and others (2006) find that a 1 percent of German
(French) GDP shock to government spending results in a European
GDP response of about 0.14 (0.08) percent after two years. For a
tax shock, spillovers are about –0.05 (–0.03) percent. Compared
with studies that express shocks in units of recipient-country GDP
(Auerbach and Gorodnichenko 2013; Goujard 2017), estimates are
also broadly similar. A detailed comparison to the literature is
provided in Blagrave and others, forthcoming.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 4

Figure 4.5. Spillovers of Fiscal Shocks on Recipient
Countries’ Output
(One-year average impact on output; percent)

Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant?

Figure 4.6. Dynamic Responses of Components of Recipient
Countries’ Output to a Fiscal Shock
(Percent of output; quarters on x-axis)

2. Investment

0.3 1. Consumption

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0

–0.1

–0.1

–0.2
0

0.00

0.3

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

0

0.3 3. Bilateral Exports

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

4. Bilateral Imports

–0.2
8
0.3

–0.05

–0.10

Overall ﬁscal shock

Spending shock

Tax shock

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Shocks are normalized to an average of 1 percent of GDP across source
countries.

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0

–0.1

–0.1

–0.2
0

The empirical spillover estimates are robust to alternative specifications and shock-identification strategies.
For example, the baseline results do not change much
with the inclusion of additional control variables (for
example, the recipient-country short-term interest rate, output gap, unemployment rate, and fiscal
stance).18 Estimates are also similar—though slightly
larger—using a panel vector autoregression estimation
methodology that allows for potential feedback effects
of exchange rates and interest rates on output. In addition, estimates using comparable fiscal shocks obtained
from alternative identification strategies—namely forecast errors and narrative approach—also yield spillover
estimates that are similar in size and dynamics. This
provides reassurance that the baseline results are not
driven by the structural vector autoregression methodology for identifying fiscal shocks.19 Annex 4.3 gives
more details about robustness tests.

18These robustness checks can be found in Blagrave and others
(forthcoming).
19Forecast errors are constructed as the difference between actual
and projected values of the relevant fiscal variable (spending or tax
revenues). The shocks based on forecast errors are identified as residuals from a regression of the spending- or tax-based forecast errors
on GDP forecast errors and lagged macroeconomic variables.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

0

0.3 5. Domestic Demand

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

6. Bilateral Net Exports

–0.2
8
0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0

–0.1

–0.1

–0.2
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

–0.2
8

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: t = 0 is the quarter of the shock. Solid lines denote point estimates, and
dashed lines denote 90 percent conﬁdence bands. Responses to an overall ﬁscal
shock are presented. Shocks are normalized to an average of 1 percent of GDP
across source countries.

Spillovers under Different Economic and
Policy Conditions
Business cycle and monetary policy conditions in
both source and recipient countries, along with the
bilateral exchange rate regime, can affect the magnitude of spillovers from fiscal policy. As outlined earlier
in the conceptual framework, these factors are expected
to affect the domestic impact of fiscal shocks—if
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

193

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 4.7. Spillovers under Various Economic and Policy
Conditions
(One-year average impact on output; percent)
0.20 1. Conditions in Recipient Countries

they pertain to the source country—as well as their
cross-border transmission. In general, a larger impact
in the source country is expected to give rise to more
significant spillovers.
Cyclical Position and Monetary Policy Constraints

0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

Baseline

No slack

Slack

No ELB

ELB

No ELB

ELB

0.20 2. Conditions in Source Countries
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

Baseline

No slack

Slack

0.20 3. Summary
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

Baseline

Normal times1

Slack2

ELB2

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: ELB = effective lower bound. Slack is deﬁned as output gap below zero; and
ELB corresponds to short-term interest rates in the bottom 25 percent of crosscountry historical distribution. Responses to an overall ﬁscal shock are presented.
Shocks are normalized to an average of 1 percent of GDP across source countries.
1
Normal times refer to average of no slack and no ELB in both source and recipient
countries.
2
Average estimates for conditions in source countries and conditions in recipient
countries.

To test how cyclical positions and monetary policy
affect the impact of fiscal shocks, the baseline econometric
framework is augmented to allow for potential regime
dependence (see Annex 4.2 for details). The definitions of
regimes are based on the prevailing output gap or the level
of the short-term interest rate in either source or recipient
countries. Specifically, a negative output gap is assumed
to represent economic slack, and a short-term interest rate
below the 25th percentile of the relevant cross-country
distribution is a proxy for monetary policy constrained by
the effective lower bound.20 Results are robust to using
alternative definitions of slack, including the unemployment gap or smooth-transition probability as in Auerbach
and Gorodnichenko (2013). For the effective lower
bound, results are also robust to using an absolute interest
rate threshold that is common to all countries.
Consistent with theory and empirical findings in the
domestic multiplier literature, spillovers are estimated to
be larger during episodes of economic slack than in normal times. For example, if the recipient country has slack
when the external fiscal shock hits, its output would rise
by 0.11 percent over the first year in response to a 1 percent of GDP overall fiscal shock in an average major
advanced economy. By contrast, the response to the same
shock would be almost halved—to 0.06 percent—when
there is no economic slack (Figure 4.7, panel 1). Differential effects are also observed when the source economy has slack, compared with when it does not—with
estimates varying between 0.09 percent and 0.03 percent,
respectively (Figure 4.7, panel 2).
Spillovers can be even larger when monetary policy
is constrained by the effective lower bound, either in
the source or the recipient country (Figure 4.7, panels
1 and 2). For example, subject to a 1 percent of GDP
overall fiscal shock in an average major advanced economy, the response of recipient-country output can be
more than four times greater when its interest rate is
exceptionally lower than in normal times.21 Monetary
20Separate distributions are applied for advanced and emerging
market economies.
21These results—for both slack and effective lower bound cases,
in both recipient and source countries—also extend to disaggregated
spending and tax shocks (see Blagrave and others, forthcoming, for
more details).

194

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 4

policy constraints in source countries have a similar
effect on spillovers, as they can amplify the domestic
impact of fiscal shocks. Although slack and the effective lower bound have distinct mechanisms to amplify
spillovers, it is often difficult to clearly distinguish the
two states in empirical estimation because they can
coincide in practice, as has occurred in recent years.22
This caveat should be kept in mind when interpreting
the results.
The response of GDP components under monetary
policy constraints offers further insights into how
a fiscal shock is transmitted to recipient countries
(Figure 4.8). Faced with a positive fiscal shock from
abroad, consumption—and particularly investment—
in a recipient country responds much more strongly
when the domestic nominal interest rate is close to
the effective lower bound, likely reflecting declining
real interest rates associated with higher expected
inflation. This is consistent with results from theoretical models (see section on factors affecting
transmission) and is confirmed by the results of
the model-based simulations presented in the next
section. The responses of exports to and imports from
the source countries are also stronger when monetary
policy accommodates the fiscal shock, in line with the
domestic response of investment.
Exchange Rate Regime
As discussed in the section on factors affecting
transmission, the exchange rate regime can also
impact the size of fiscal spillovers. To investigate this
question, this section analyzes whether the impact
of a fiscal shock in the United States varies for
recipient countries with fixed and flexible exchange
rate regimes vis-à-vis the US dollar. The United
States—with its global currency and systemic trade
importance—is a suitable source country for this
exercise. Countries do not typically peg to the British
pound or the Japanese yen. In the case of the euro,
Germany’s and France’s trade importance is mostly
within Europe, where most sample countries are
22In the post-2000 sample considered in this empirical exercise,
about 26 percent of country-quarter observations fall under the definition of “effective lower bound,” three-quarters of which coincide
with economic slack. Similarly, about 55 percent of observations fall
under the definition of “slack,” 35 percent of which coincide with
the effective lower bound. For example, many advanced economies
experienced both severe slack and very low interest rates in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. Japan, in particular, experienced
both slack and effective lower bound for 84 percent of the observations during the sample period.

Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant?

Figure 4.8. Dynamic Reponses of Components of Recipient
Countries’ Output under Normal Times and Effective Lower
Bound in Recipient Countries
(Percent of output; quarters on x-axis)
0.3 1. Consumption under
Normal Times
0.2

2. Consumption under
Effective Lower
Bound

0.3
0.2

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0

–0.1

–0.1

–0.2
0

2

4

6

8

0

0.5 3. Investment under
Normal Times
0.4

2

4

6

–0.2
8

4. Investment under Effective 0.5
Lower Bound
0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0

–0.1
0

2

4

6

8

0

2

4

6

6. Bilateral Exports under
Effective Lower Bound

0.8 5. Bilateral Exports under
Normal Times
0.6

–0.1
8
0.8
0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

–0.2
0

2

4

6

0.5 7. Bilateral Imports under
Normal Times
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
0
2
4
6

8

0

2

4

–0.2
8

6

8. Bilateral Imports under
Effective Lower Bound

8

0

2

4

6

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
8

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Normal times = no effective lower bound. t = 0 is the quarter of the shock.
Solid red lines denote point estimates under different conditions; dashed red lines
denote 90 percent conﬁdence bands; and solid blue lines represent the
unconditional response. Effective lower bound corresponds to short-term interest
rates in the bottom 25 percent of cross-country historical distribution. Responses
to an overall ﬁscal shock are presented. Shocks are normalized to an average of
1 percent of GDP across source countries.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

195

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 4.9. Dynamic Reponses of Recipient Countries’ Output
to US Spending Shock under Various Exchange Rate Regimes
(Impact on output, percent; quarters on x-axis)
1.2 1. Fixed Regime:
Reinhart-Rogoff
1.0
Classiﬁcation

2. Flexible Regime:
Reinhart-Rogoff
Classiﬁcation

1.2
1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

–0.2
0

2

4

6

8

0

1.2 3. Fixed Regime:
IMF Classiﬁcation
1.0

2

4

6

4. Flexible Regime:
IMF Classiﬁcation

–0.2
8
1.2
1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

–0.2
0

2

4

6

8

0

2

4

6

–0.2
8

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: t = 0 is the quarter of the shock. Solid red lines denote point estimates
conditional on exchange rate regime; dashed red lines denote 90 percent
conﬁdence bands; and solid blue lines represent the unconditional estimates.
Shocks are normalized to an average of 1 percent of GDP across source countries
(note that this represents a less than 1 percent of US GDP shock).

either euro area members or peg to the euro, not
allowing for enough variation in the data to identify
the effect for those with flexible regimes.
The empirical framework is again modified to
allow for regime dependence of the fiscal shock—now
originating only in the United States—where the
regime definition is based on the prevailing bilateral exchange rate arrangement between the United
States and the recipient country in a particular
period. Specifically, a “fixed” exchange rate regime
is defined as encompassing de facto pegs or crawling pegs, classified using two alternative methods:
(1) Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) updated by Ilzetzki,
Reinhart, and Rogoff (2017a, 2017b)—henceforth
called “Reinhart-Rogoff” classification; and (2) the
IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and
196

Exchange Restrictions (“IMF” classification).23 More
details are provided in Annex 4.1.
The evidence suggests that a government spending
shock in the United States generates stronger and
more persistent impacts on countries whose exchange
rates are pegged to the US dollar than on those whose
exchange rates are more flexible (Figure 4.9). This is
the case regardless of which exchange regime classification is used. The difference in the output responses
between fixed and flexible regimes is statistically significant on impact under both classifications and also
during the second year under the Reinhart-Rogoff classification. At the same time, no difference in spillovers
is observed between fixed and flexible regimes from an
overall fiscal shock or a tax shock (not shown). Taken
at face value, this result seems to point to relatively
weak expenditure switching effects in the transmission
of spending shocks. This weakness could reflect that,
for a significant portion of the sample, US monetary
policy was constrained by the effective lower bound,
limiting interest rate and hence exchange rate movements. Another possibility is that, as discussed earlier,
trade integration may be stronger under pegs—beyond
what can be captured by the simple import ratios used
in weighting the shocks.

The Transmission of Fiscal Shocks—
Model-Based Analysis
To complement the empirical analysis, the chapter
presents model-based simulations using a multiregion
general equilibrium model—the IMF’s G20 Model.
The model simulations are intended to be illustrative
and offer further insights into the macroeconomic
adjustment to fiscal shocks—including the response
of exchange and interest rates—and more granularity
on the impacts of various fiscal instruments. Overall,
simulations serve as theory-based cross-checks on the
empirical results and provide insights into how fiscal
shocks are propagated.24
The results are generally consistent with the empirical findings in this chapter: simulations show that
spillovers from temporary fiscal shocks can differ
23In 2015, for example, the Reinhart-Rogoff classification has
more recipient countries classified as having “fixed” exchange rates
compared with the IMF classification. The number of fixed-rate
countries varies over time. In general, there tend to be more fixed
exchange rate regimes in earlier years of the sample.
24Additional details on the G20 Model are available in Andrle and
others (2015).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 4

substantially depending on the monetary policy
response and the fiscal instruments used. In addition,
the responses of GDP components under different
assumptions on monetary accommodation closely
resemble those identified empirically.25 In all cases, fiscal shocks are expressed as a share (generally 1 percent)
of a particular source country’s GDP—this differs from
how results were presented in the empirical section
and implies that, all else equal, shocks emanating from
larger countries will have larger spillover effects.

Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant?

Figure 4.10. Impact of Fiscal Shocks on Global GDP Based on
Various Instruments
(Two-year average impact, percent)
0.20
0.18
United States
France and Germany

0.16
0.14
0.12
0.10

Spillovers on Output: Fiscal Instruments and Policy
Accommodation
The model simulations confirm substantial spillovers from government spending shocks. Specifically,
they show that spending shocks have larger spillover
effects than do tax shocks.26 This coincides with
results from the empirical analysis described in this
chapter. However, structural models offer insights
into the impact of specific fiscal instruments as well,
as shown in Figure 4.10:
•• Spending instruments: Government investment
shocks in the G20 Model have larger domestic and
spillover effects than shocks to government consumption. This is because government investment
increases the public capital stock, which is assumed
to increase private sector productivity, stimulating
private investment and labor demand and in turn
raising wages and labor income. By contrast, government consumption does not affect private sector
productivity.
•• Tax instruments: Model simulations suggest that
temporary changes in consumption taxes have the
largest domestic and spillover effects among tax
instruments. Unlike cuts in labor income or corporate taxes, where benefits can be saved, households
must increase their current-period spending to
take advantage of temporarily lower consumption

25The domestic and spillover effects of permanent fiscal shocks
may differ from those of temporary shocks, partly because of their
effects on interest rates. For example, permanent fiscal consolidations
in large countries may lower global interest rates, thereby crowding
in investment and boosting GDP over the long term. Some permanent fiscal reform scenarios are considered in the next section.
26For simplicity, the analysis presented here is conducted for
France, Germany, and the United States; the intention is to draw
broad lessons about the heterogeneity of spillovers across different
fiscal instruments. The findings presented here apply equally to other
countries’ fiscal shocks.

0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00

Government
investment

Government Labor income
consumption
tax

Corporate
income tax

Value-added
tax

Source: IMF, G20 Model (G20MOD) simulations.
Note: All shocks are 1 percent of source -country GDP, lasting two years.

taxes.27 In addition, because investment decisions
have a long planning horizon and investment can
be costly to adjust (Christiano, Eichenbaum, and
Evans 2005), the impact of temporary corporate
income tax changes is smaller than that of temporary labor income tax changes—the latter affect
liquidity-constrained households, which fully adjust
consumption in response.
Consistent with the empirical analysis, model
simulations show that spillovers on output can vary
widely, depending on the response of monetary policy,
in both source and recipient countries. Figure 4.11
depicts the impact of the same temporary two-year
US government spending and tax shocks considered
in Figure 4.10—using the average across spending and
tax instruments—on recipient-country GDP under
different monetary policy assumptions: (1) a rule-based
response in both source and recipient countries,
(2) accommodation in the United States during the
first two years following the fiscal shock, (3) accommodation in recipient countries during the first two
27Conversely, when consumption taxes increase temporarily, households can avoid some of the burden by postponing consumption.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

197

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 4.11. Spillovers from US Fiscal Shocks with and
without Monetary Accommodation
(Two-year average impact on rest of the world GDP, percent)
0.8
Normal response of monetary
policy
Monetary accommodation in
United States only
Monetary accommodation in
recipient countries
Monetary accommodation in
all countries

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

Government spending

Tax revenue

Source: IMF, G20 Model (G20MOD) simulations.
Note: Normal response of monetary policy is a rule-based response, in countries
without ﬁxed exchange rate regimes, where monetary policy responds to an
increase in expected future inﬂation by increasing nominal interest rates to reduce
demand and return inﬂation to target.

years, and (4) accommodation in both the United
States and recipient countries during the same period.
Spillovers vary markedly depending on the response of
monetary policy—for example, they can be about four
times larger if monetary policy in recipient countries
fully accommodates the shock, as compared with
when monetary policy follows the inflation-forecast
targeting rule in each country.28,29 These results are
closely aligned with the empirical analysis presented in
Figure 4.7—when interest rates in the recipient country are at or near the effective lower bound, spillover
effects are estimated to be about four times larger than
they are during normal times.
Model-based simulations can also offer insights
in terms of regional patterns of the impact of fiscal
shocks. Spillovers from stimulus in the United States
28In the G20 Model, monetary policy in countries with flexible
exchange rate regimes responds to an increase in expected future
inflation by increasing nominal interest rates to reduce demand and
return inflation to target.
29Spillovers are even larger under the full accommodation
scenario—they should be viewed as an upper bound, as such a
scenario would require an exceptional coordinated accommodation
by monetary policy in all countries.

198

have the broadest global reach—due to the large size of
the US economy and its moderately strong trade links
with most regions (Figure 4.12).30 Spillovers from the
United States are largest on countries in Latin America and Canada—all of which account for significant
shares of US import demand. For shocks from France
and Germany, spillovers are largest on Europe, given
deep trade integration, but relatively small on other
regions. Finally, fiscal measures in China have meaningful spillovers on each region due to the size and
openness of the Chinese economy. By region, spillovers
are slightly larger on countries in Asia—given strong
trade links—though spillovers on Europe, Canada,
and Latin America are not trivial. China’s economy,
given its growing global clout, is playing an important
role in driving spillovers onto neighboring countries
through the trade channel and the impact of fluctuations in demand on commodity prices (IMF 2016).

Macroeconomic Adjustment and the Role of
Financial Variables
Model simulations can give a richer description of
the macroeconomic dynamics behind fiscal spillovers. In
particular, simulations allow for an examination of the
dynamics of interest rates and exchange rates—because
these variables are forward-looking in nature, they
respond to changes in the expected future state of the
economy, so when a change in fiscal policy is announced
or expected, these variables react immediately. This
makes it difficult to capture their behavior in empirical
exercises using structural shocks, which typically assess
the impact of the implementation of fiscal changes.31
The chapter uses both model-based analysis and an
alternative empirical approach that isolates anticipation
effects to assess the impact of fiscal shocks on exchange
rates and external positions in recipient countries.
To shed light on the dynamics of adjustment following fiscal shocks, Figure 4.13 presents the response
of several variables in the United States and the global
30The regional distribution of spillovers predicted by model simulations closely resembles those implied by the empirical analysis presented earlier. See Blagrave and others (forthcoming) for more details.
31Several studies estimating fiscal shocks in structural vector
autoregression models find that increases in government spending trigger exchange rate depreciations—see, for example, Corsetti
and Müller (2006); Kim and Roubini (2008); Monacelli and
Perotti (2010); Enders, Müller, and Scholl (2011); and Ravn,
Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe (2012). This empirical result runs counter
to the predictions of the Mundell-Fleming-Dornbusch framework,
although it is consistent with some new open-economy macroeconomic models (Obstfeld and Rogoff 1995).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 4

Figure 4.12. Regional GDP Impact of Government Spending
Shocks from the United States, Europe, and China
(Two-year average impact, percent)

Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant?

Figure 4.13. Dynamic Reponses to a US Government Spending
Shock
(Percent deviation from baseline)

0.16

Spending shock without monetary accommodation
Spending shock with monetary accommodation

0.14
2.5 1. US Real GDP

0.12

2.0

0.10
0.08
0.06

0.02
Europe
shock:
impact
on
Canada,
Lat. Am.

Europe
shock:
impact
on Asia

China China China
shock: shock: shock:
impact impact impact
on on Asia
on EU
Canada,
Lat. Am.

Source: IMF, G20 Model (G20MOD) simulations.
Note: EU = European Union; Lat. Am. = Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Mexico).
Europe shock refers to France and Germany shocks. Shock to government
spending is equivalent to 1 percent of GDP, lasting two years. Average level impact
over two years with no monetary accommodation in any country is presented.

2.0
1.5

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0
18

19

20

21

22 2017

18

19

20

21

0.2
0.0

1.0

–0.2

0.5

–0.4

0.0

–0.6

–0.5

–0.8
2017

18

19

20

21

3.0 5. Rest of the World:
Real Exports
2.5

22 2017

18

19

20

21

6. Rest of the World:
Real Imports

2.0
1.5

1.5

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0
–0.5
2017

–1.0
22
2.5

2.0

economy to a temporary government spending increase
in the United States. Given the importance of the
monetary policy reaction, it presents a two-year stimulus scenario under both a normal monetary policy
response (blue line) and monetary policy accommodation in all countries (red line).
•• Monetary policy response: Following the fiscal shock,
policy rates increase to curb inflationary pressures
from the demand shock both in the United States
and in recipient countries. The uncovered interest parity condition implies that bilateral nominal
exchange rates in relation to the US dollar depreciate
in the short term given that the response of US monetary policy is more pronounced than elsewhere—
being the source of the shock, inflationary pressures
are greater there. The increase in US external demand
and the nominal exchange rate depreciation in recipient countries induce a modest increase in exports
from the rest of the world, and thus a slight improvement in the corresponding trade balances. However,

–0.5
22

4. Rest of the World: Nominal 2.5
Exchange Rate vis-à-vis
2.0
US Dollar1
1.5

0.6 3. Rest of the World: Real
Interest Rate
0.4
US Europe
US
US
shock: shock: shock: shock:
impact impact impact impact
on on Asia on EU
on EU
Canada,
Lat. Am.

2.5

1.5

–0.5
2017

0.04

0.00

2. Rest of the World:
Real GDP

18

19

20

21

2.5 7. Rest of the World: Real
Consumption
2.0

22 2017

18

19

20

21

8. Rest of the World:
Real Investment

–0.5
22
2.5
2.0

1.5

1.5

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

–0.5
2017

18

19

20

21

22 2017

18

19

20

21

–0.5
22

Source: IMF, G20 Model (G20MOD) simulations.
Note: Red lines denote the response to a 1 percent of GDP US government spending
shock lasting two years with monetary accommodation in both source and recipient
countries lasting two years, and blue lines represent the response to the same
shock without monetary accommodation in any country.
1Increase represents appreciation.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

199

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Figure 4.14. Spillovers from US Spending Shock with and
without a US Term-Premium Increase

conditions—and imports, due to stronger domestic
activity in recipients. The expenditure switching
channel operates in the opposite direction under
monetary accommodation, with recipient countries’ real exchange rates appreciating against the
US dollar. This occurs because the negative impact
on US real interest rates is more pronounced than
elsewhere. Recipients’ trade balances still improve
because of the strong increase in demand from the
United States. Overall, as shown in Figure 4.11, the
cumulative effect on global GDP is amplified under
monetary accommodation.

(Percent deviation from baseline)

Spending shock without
US term-premium increase

Spending shock with US termpremium increase

0.8 1. US Real GDP
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
–0.2
2017

18

19

20

21

22

21

22

0.8 2. World Real GDP excluding United States
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
–0.2
2017

18

19

20

Source: IMF, G20 Model (G20MOD) simulations.
Note: Red lines denote the response to a 1 percent of GDP US government
spending shock lasting two years, with a 25 basis point increase in the US term
premium and subsequent spillovers to term premiums in other countries. Blue
lines represent the response to the same spending shock with no term-premium
increase. No monetary accommodation is assumed for any country.

the increase in world interest rates reduces consumption and investment in the rest of the world. The net
effect on GDP is small but positive.
•• Monetary accommodation: In this scenario, the
positive impact on inflation goes unchecked, causing
real interest rates to decline. This triggers a strong
positive response in both consumption and investment in the rest of the world as the cost of capital
and current-period consumption declines. The
contrast between the dynamics of consumption
and investment under monetary accommodation,
as opposed to normal times, is consistent with the
empirical findings shown in Figure 4.8. Monetary
accommodation also implies a much larger impact
on both exports—due to stronger external demand
200

If the term premium increases following a fiscal
impulse—capturing potential concerns about debt
sustainability or higher future inflation—and monetary
policy responds normally, the impact of stimulus in the
United States is reduced and spillovers are marginally
smaller (Figure 4.14). In this case, higher interest rates
than in the baseline scenario discourage investment
and consumption in the United States. Therefore, the
net effect on GDP in the rest of the world is slightly
smaller, illustrating the potential for an adverse reaction of financial markets to an increase in spending
to reduce spillovers.32 This possibility underscores the
importance of having a credible medium-term macroeconomic framework, which gives market participants
confidence that inflation will be held in check because
debt dynamics are sustainable.
An empirical examination of how exchange rates
and external positions respond to fiscal shocks is presented in Box 4.1. To capture anticipation effects, the
analysis constructs fiscal shocks based on the methodology of Forni and Gambetti (2016), which identifies
these shocks at announcement dates, as captured by
changes in professional forecasts. It shows that an
increase in government spending in the United States
leads to a real appreciation of the dollar and a worsening of the US trade balance, as predicted by standard
macroeconomic models.

Fiscal Reforms
The model-based analysis also facilitates the examination of spillovers from so-called fiscal reforms—defined
32In this scenario, the increase in the US term premium is
assumed to drive up term premiums in other countries as well,
according to historical correlations between these variables
across countries.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 4

as permanent budget-neutral shifts in the composition
of the public sector budget. The scenarios considered so
far in the chapter deal with temporary fiscal impulses
associated with a change in the fiscal stance in the
source country. However, budget-neutral fiscal reforms
may also have spillover effects. To demonstrate these
differences, the following two scenarios are considered:
(1) a budget-neutral corporate income tax reform and
(2) a budget-neutral infrastructure spending increase.
These illustrative scenarios suggest that fiscal reforms
have limited cross-border effects, though significant
changes can still generate large spillovers.

Budget-Neutral Corporate Income Tax Reform
The direct spillovers of a (simultaneous)
budget-neutral reduction in corporate income tax
rates in France, Germany, and the United States—the
“source” countries in this scenario—would be slightly
negative.33 The scenario’s main assumptions are that
corporate tax rates are reduced by 15 percentage
points, consumption-tax rates rise to offset the revenue
loss, and monetary policy responds normally.34 The
direct impact of the reform is captured by the blue
lines in Figure 4.15. As shown in the figure,
•• Real GDP increases gradually as lower corporate
income tax rates raise the return to capital in the
source countries, stimulating investment. This
positive effect on reform-country GDP is only partly
counteracted by the increase in the consumption tax
rate, which depresses consumption. Although these
reforms are initially budget neutral, the expansion of
investment increases tax revenues over time, which
reduces the deficit and the debt stock in source
countries.35 Their trade balances deteriorate slightly
due to investment-driven import demand.
•• Given the lack of fiscal stimulus in the short term,
the direct spillovers on recipient countries are limited.
Over the medium term, GDP in recipient countries
is slightly reduced, as recipient countries are now at a
33France, Germany, and the United States are considered in
this scenario given that they currently have corporate income tax
rates above the OECD average, giving them scope for a substantial
reduction. Reforms are budget neutral, contingent on the baseline
path of output.
34In the case of the United States, which has no federal consumption tax, this would imply enacting such a tax.
35Absent the offsetting increase in consumption taxes, the
corporate income tax reduction would result in a net loss of tax
revenues, even after accounting for the increase in the tax base due
to stronger investment.

Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant?

Figure 4.15. Spillovers from Corporate Income Tax Reduction
Financed by an Offsetting Increase in Value-Added Tax
(Percentage-point deviation from baseline, unless noted otherwise)
CIT/VAT reform direct impact only
CIT/VAT reform plus assumptions on investment shift
CIT/VAT reform plus assumptions on proﬁt and investment shift
5 1. Real GDP: Countries
Pursuing CIT/VAT Reforms
4
(Percent deviation from
baseline)
3

2. Real GDP:
Rest of the World
(Percent deviation from
baseline)

5
4
3

2

2

1

1

0

0

–1

–1

–2
2017

19

21

23

25

2 3. Government Debt to GDP:
Countries Pursuing CIT/VAT
1
Reforms

27 2017

19

21

23

25

4. Government Debt to GDP:
Rest of the World

–2
27
2
1

0

0

–1

–1

–2

–2

–3

–3

–4
2017

19

21

23

25

3 5. Trade Balance,
Contribution to GDP:
Countries Pursuing
2
CIT/VAT reforms
1

27 2017

19

21

23

25

6. Trade Balance,
Contribution to GDP:
Rest of the World

–4
27
3
2
1

0

0

–1

–1

–2

–2

–3
2017

19

21

23

25

27 2017

19

21

23

25

–3
27

Sources: IMF, G20 Model (G20MOD) simulations; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: Blue lines denote the response to CIT/VAT reforms only, red lines denote the
response to CIT/VAT reforms plus assumptions on investment shift, and yellow lines
denote the response to CIT/VAT reforms plus assumptions on proﬁt and investment
shift. No monetary accommodation is assumed for any country. For rest of the
world, no reforms are assumed. CIT = corporate income tax; VAT = value-added
tax.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

201

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

competitive disadvantage with respect to their return
to capital, and real interest rates are slightly higher—
implying lower investment. This negative impact
more than offsets the small impetus to exports associated with increased demand from source countries.
However, beyond this direct effect, fiscal reforms
may also affect investment and profit-reporting decisions. As discussed in Devereux (2008) and De Mooij
and Ederveen (2008), corporate tax rates influence
both intensive and extensive (discrete or location) decisions of firms, suggesting that multinational companies
may relocate operations when faced with significant
changes in relative tax rates in different jurisdictions.
In addition, both studies note that it is feasible for
multinational companies to shift profits between
countries. In the scenario, the lower corporate income
tax rates prompt these firms to shift operations—
both investment and the jurisdiction in which profits
are reported—to source countries, to the detriment
of recipients.
The effect of investment and profit shifting are illustrated by the red (investment shifting only) and yellow
(investment and profit shifting together) lines of Figure 4.15. Based on estimates in the literature on profit
and investment shifting, the scenario assumes that
foreign direct investment in countries not pursuing
reforms could decline by about $400 billion—this loss
is assumed to be distributed equally across all countries as a share of GDP.36 By contrast, the countries
pursuing reforms are assumed to benefit by a similar
amount, above and beyond the immediate impact on
investment from the corporate income tax reduction
discussed above.37 Profit shifting is assumed to be a

36This is a simplifying assumption. Countries that currently benefit from a significant corporate income tax gap relative to the source
countries, or those with a significant presence of multinational corporations based in countries pursuing corporate income tax reforms,
may be more adversely affected by investment shifting.
37The assumed impact of investment shifting is derived by applying an estimated semielasticity of the corporate tax base to tax rate
changes from De Mooij and Ederveen (2008)—taken to be –3.2—
to foreign direct investment inflows and outflow data for France,
Germany, and the United States, which proxy the foreign portion of
the corporate tax base subject to relocation. Under a large corporate
income tax rate reduction, foreign direct investment inflows would
increase as foreign multinationals choose to locate more production
in the countries pursuing reforms, and outflows would decline as
domestic multinationals choose to develop more production capacity
domestically. It is important to note that semielasticities in the literature vary widely and that the estimated investment-shifting impact
of corporate income tax reform is sensitive to these assumptions.

202

pure fiscal revenue gain for source countries and a
corresponding loss for other countries.38
The results suggest that investment shifting and
profit shifting could trigger more significant spillovers on activity and affect fiscal positions. Activity
in source countries would be considerably higher—
with GDP increasing by almost 4 percent after 10
years—although significantly reduced elsewhere, by
about 1 percent. Corresponding changes in trade
balances would imply a material deterioration for
corporate-tax-reforming countries—as import demand
rises significantly—and an improvement for the rest
of the world, due to import compression and export
growth. Both investment shifting and profit shifting
can also have an impact on fiscal positions, improving
the primary balance of source countries and undermining the balance of others, above and beyond the
direct effects of the corporate income tax reform itself.
The marginal impact of profit shifting on public debt
stocks can be seen by comparing the red and yellow
lines in panels 3 and 4 of Figure 4.15—it is clear that
the impact of investment shifting (measured by comparing the blue and the red lines) is much larger than
that of profit shifting.39

Budget-Neutral Permanent Increase in
Public Investment
Compared with corporate income tax reforms that
trigger investment and profit shifting, a budget-neutral
permanent increase in public investment would have
very modest spillovers.40 The scenario assumes a ½ percent of GDP increase in public investment in the five
large economies considered in the empirical exercise—
France, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, and
the United States—which is financed by an increase
38The

assumed impact of profit shifting is derived by applying
an estimated semielasticity of profits with respect to the tax rate—a
value of 2, taken from De Mooij and Ederveen (2008)—to estimates
of the share of multinational firms in each country, which is assumed
to be approximately 0.6 in Germany and France and 0.3 in the
United States, and to the corporate income tax rate reduction being
considered (15 percentage points). The same caveats mentioned for
investment shifting regarding elasticities apply.
39The impact on public debt in this scenario is only transitory,
with all debt-to-GDP ratios returning to baseline in the long term.
The speed of adjustment back to baseline depends on assumptions
regarding the aggressiveness of the model’s fiscal rule—other assumptions would lead to different adjustment dynamics.
40This result is broadly consistent with results reported in Bussière
and others (2017), who find that most budget-neutral fiscal reforms
do not have large cross-border trade spillovers, except in the case of
coordinated reforms in periods of accommodative monetary policy.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 4

in consumption taxes. Such a reform would boost
the capital stock in source countries, thereby increasing output permanently—the increase in investment
resulting from the higher productivity associated with
an expansion of the public capital stock outweighs the
negative impact on domestic consumption of higher
consumption taxes. However, as shown in Figure 4.16,
although there would be some modest cross-border
impact due to expenditure shifting, the impact would
be muted by an exchange rate depreciation in source
countries, implying that the expenditure switching
channel will eventually offset the positive effect.41 The
impact on recipient countries’ trade balances is small,
but negative.

Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant?

Figure 4.16. Spillovers from Increase in Government
Investment in Five Major Economies
(Percent deviation from baseline)

1.2 1. Real GDP, Consumption, and Investment in Source Countries
Real GDP
Real investment

0.8
0.4

Real consumption

0.0
–0.4
–0.8
–1.2
2017

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

23

24

25

26

27

0.2 2. Real GDP in Recipient Countries

Conclusions
Positive cross-country spillovers from collective fiscal policy actions helped the global economy recover
from the global financial crisis, but do fiscal spillovers
still matter under much-improved economic conditions today? The chapter finds that spillovers continue to be relevant, but to what extent depends on
circumstances in both source and recipient countries.
It shows that fiscal spillovers tend to be lower when a
fiscal shock originates from a country where GDP is
at its potential, but that the impact intensifies when
either the source or recipient country is in recession
and/or benefiting from accommodative monetary
policy. This suggests that spillovers are generally
large when domestic multipliers are also large. The
chapter also finds that spillovers from government
spending shocks are larger than those associated with
tax shocks, that the transmission of fiscal shocks
may be greater among countries with fixed exchange
rates, and that transmission may be dampened if the
fiscal impulse at the source tightens global financial conditions.
While the chapter does not offer conclusions about
how individual countries should conduct fiscal policy
from a domestic perspective, it provides information about potential cross-country effects from such
action. The current juncture suggests that positive
cross-border effects from stimulus in countries with
broadly closed output gaps will generally be smaller
than during the crisis, but there could still be ben41A permanent productivity shock in source countries increases
supply by more than demand, implying that the relative price of
source-country goods must fall in equilibrium.

0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
2017

18

19

20

21

22

Source: IMF, G20 Model (G20MOD) simulations.
Note: Spillovers from a permanent 0.5 percent of GDP increase in government
investment in ﬁve major economies (France, Germany, Japan, United Kingdom,
United States) ﬁnanced via value-added tax. No monetary accommodation is
assumed for any country.

efits. For example, in the euro area, spillovers from
a more expansionary fiscal stance in countries with
fiscal space—such as higher public investment to raise
potential output in Germany—on some trading partners experiencing weak cyclical positions might still be
important due to continued accommodative monetary
policy and evidence suggesting that spillovers tend to
be amplified by currency pegs. More generally, the
fiscal instrument also matters: spending on public
investment is likely to produce greater cross-border
dividends than tax cuts.
The chapter also presents illustrative scenarios
of fiscal reforms in which a change in the makeup
of the government budget that does not generate a
short-term change in the fiscal stance come with small
spillovers. However, substantial fiscal reforms, such
as large budget-neutral corporate income tax rate
reductions—compensated with increases in consumption taxes—that affect the investment-location and
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

203

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

profit-reporting decisions of multinational firms, could
have large spillovers.
Finally, and not surprisingly, fiscal actions with
economically meaningful cross-border effects can
also impact trade balances. For example, the chapter
suggests that fiscal stimulus tends to lead to a dete-

204

rioration in the trade balance of the country where
it occurs, with corresponding improvements in the
positions of trading partners. This implies that a
fiscal expansion in the United States could exacerbate
global current account imbalances, while stimulus in
Germany would tend to reduce them.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 4

Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant?

Box 4.1. The Spillover Impact of US Government Spending Shocks on External Positions
Consensus on the effect of government spending
shocks on a country’s exchange rate and external balance remains elusive in the empirical literature.1 This
may stem partly from the difficulty of isolating agents’
anticipation of fiscal policies, given both legislative
and implementation lags, as highlighted by Ramey
(2011), among others. This box and a related spillover
note (Popescu and Shibata, forthcoming) examine
the impact of fiscal spending shocks from the United
States on the US trade balance and real exchange rate,
from both a multilateral and a bilateral perspective,
while carefully taking into consideration the issue of
fiscal foresight.
To capture anticipation effects, the approach follows
Forni and Gambetti (2016) and relies on professional
forecasters’ surveys to identify fiscal shocks at the
announcement rather than implementation date.2
Methodologically, the fiscal foresight (“news”) shock
is identified in a vector autoregression using US data
from the first quarter of 1981 through the fourth
quarter of 2016.3 The analysis further extends Forni
and Gambetti (2016) to a cross-country perspective
to account for recipients’ macroeconomic conditions,
which is the main unique contribution of this exercise.
The results suggest that news of future government
spending leads to a real appreciation of the US dollar
and deterioration of the US trade balance—in line
with theory and solving the “depreciation puzzle”
found in most previous studies. As discussed in Forni
and Gambetti (2016), the key intuition is that the
inclusion of additional information on fiscal expectations and forecasts improves the estimation of the
effects of fiscal spending shocks by capturing more
precisely the timing of the impact. The timing is likely
The authors of this box are Adina Popescu and Ippei Shibata.
1For example, while the theoretical literature tends to predict
that increases in government spending would trigger exchange
rate appreciations, the empirical literature often finds the opposite in the case of the United States; this is usually referred to as
the “depreciation puzzle.”
2More specifically, the Survey of Professional Forecasters forecasts of government spending are used to capture preannounced
or anticipated (also called “news” or “foresight”) fiscal spending
by exploiting the change in forecast expectations.
3The vector autoregression includes, in this order: real federal
government consumption expenditures and gross investment, the
fiscal news variable based on Survey of Professional Forecasters
forecasts, real GDP, private consumption, the federal surplus
divided by GDP, net exports of goods and services divided by
GDP, the 10-year Treasury constant maturity rate, and the real
effective exchange rate.

Figure 4.1.1. Response of Recipient
Countries’ Trade Balance and Real Exchange
Rate vis-à-vis US Dollar
(Quarters on x-axis)
Full sample

Before global ﬁnancial crisis

1.0 1. Response of Trade Balance
(Percentage points)
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

2. Response of Real Exchange Rate vis-à-vis
US Dollar
(Percent)
4
8

0
–4
–8
–12
–16
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: t = 0 is the quarter of the shock. Dashed lines denote
90 percent conﬁdence bands.

significant in assessing the response of fast-moving
variables, such as the exchange rate, which react
quickly to perceived changes in future conditions.
Moving on to the analysis of spillovers, a panel
vector autoregression analysis makes it possible to
take into account the recipient country’s macro and
policy variables (such as cyclical positions, monetary
policy, and domestic fiscal policy). The estimation uses
an unbalanced panel of 30 US trading partners (23
advanced economies and 7 emerging market economies representing about 80 percent of US imports)
from the fourth quarter of 1982 through the third
quarter of 2016. Results suggest that an anticipated
increase in US government spending triggers real

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

205

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Box 4.1 (continued)
exchange rate depreciations in other countries and
improvements in their trade balances with the United
States. More specifically, an announcement of a 1 percent of US GDP increase in government spending will
depreciate a trading partner’s exchange rate by about
5 percent after one and a half years while improving
the partner’s net exports vis-à-vis the United States by
0.3 percentage point of its own GDP after two years
(Figure 4.1.1, blue lines).
Estimation over subsamples reveals that the impact
on exchange rates and trade balances may have
diminished following the global financial crisis. The
red lines in Figure 4.1.1 plot the response of the
trade balance and real exchange rates vis-à-vis the
United States before the global financial crisis (before

206

2007), suggesting that responses were significantly
larger before the onset of the crisis. These results may
reflect constrained monetary policy in recent years,
which could have dampened US exchange rate appreciation (in response to expansionary fiscal shocks),
thus also potentially contributing to a smaller trade
balance response.
Performing the same analysis for different groups of
countries—only advanced economies or only Group
of Twenty economies—suggests that the results are
quantitatively robust. The results are also robust to
variations in the methodology, including different variable ordering and the inclusion of additional variables,
as well as to different weighting schemes (including
time-varying weights).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 4

Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant?

Annex Table 4.1.1. Data Sources for Quarterly Fiscal Data by Source Country
Country
France

Germany

Japan

United Kingdom

United States

Fiscal Data
Government spending

Data Source
Eurostat1

Seasonal Adjustment
SWDA by source

Tax revenue

Eurostat1

SWDA by source

Government spending

Deutsche Bundesbank

SWDA by source

Tax revenue

Eurostat1

X-12-ARIMA by IMF staff

Government spending

Cabinet Office of Japan

SAAR by source

Government total revenue

Ministry of Finance and
Cabinet Office

X-12-ARIMA by IMF staff

Government spending

Office for National Statistics Seasonally adjusted by source

Tax revenue

Eurostat1

X-12-ARIMA by IMF staff

Government spending

US Bureau of Economic
Analysis
US Bureau of Economic
Analysis

Seasonally adjusted by source

Tax revenue

Note
Sum of government final
consumption and GFCF
Current taxes on income
and wealth, excluding
social contributions
Sum of government final
consumption and GFCF

Sum of government final
consumption and GFCF
Extrapolated using Denton
method
Sum of government final
consumption and GFCF

Sum of government final
consumption and GFCF

Seasonally adjusted by source

Source: IMF staff compilation.
Note: For government spending, nominal levels are deflated using the GDP deflator when real levels are not directly available from the source. For tax revenue
(total revenue for Japan), real levels are calculated by deflating nominal levels using each country’s GDP deflator. GFCF = gross fixed capital formation; SAAR
= seasonally adjusted and annualized data; SWDA = seasonally and working-day adjusted data; X-12-ARIMA = US Census Bureau software package for
seasonal adjustment.
1Quarterly nonfinancial accounts for general government database from Eurostat.

Annex 4.1. Data
Data for Shock Identification
Quarterly fiscal data used in shock identification
for five shock-emitting (source) countries stem from
national statistical bureaus, either directly or via
Haver Analytics.42 Quarterly real government spending and tax revenue data used in constructing fiscal
shocks are expressed in local currency units, seasonally
adjusted, and annualized for the sample period of
2000:Q1–2016:Q2. Government spending is calculated as the sum of quarterly general government consumption and general government gross fixed capital
formation from national accounts. For tax revenue,
quarterly general government total tax income is used,
except for Japan. Data sources for each country are
listed in Annex Table 4.1.1. See Blagrave and others,
forthcoming, for more details on the data, as well as
a discussion of data limitations and construction of
fiscal shocks.

42France,

Germany, Japan, United Kingdom, United States.

Data for Spillover Analysis
Quarterly data from 55 recipient countries for
2000:Q1–2016:Q2 include series on real output,
consumption, investment, exports/imports, bilateral
good exports/imports, external demand, short-term
interest rates, output gaps, and exchange rate regimes,
collected from multiple data sources. Data sources for
each series are listed in detail in Annex Table 4.1.2,
followed by a list of all the countries in the sample in
Annex Table 4.1.3.
Data Description
•• Real GDP, consumption, investment: Quarterly real
levels are rebased to 2010 prices, expressed in local
currency units, seasonally adjusted and annualized. Investment data refer to gross fixed capital formation.
•• Exports/imports: Quarterly real levels are rebased
to 2010 prices, expressed in local currency units,
seasonally adjusted and annualized. Data from
national accounts stem from Haver Analytics and refer to total exports/imports of goods
and services.
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

207

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Annex Table 4.1.2. Data Sources for Recipient Countries
Series
Real Output

Data Sources
WEO; Haver Analytics

Estimation
Rebased to 2010; deflated
using GDP deflator

Countries Missing Data Note
None in the sample
Seasonally adjusted, annualized,
in national currency

Real Consumption, Haver Analytics
Investment, Exports,
Imports

Rebased to 2010; deflated
Vietnam
using respective deflators for
each country and variable

Seasonally adjusted, annualized,
in national currency; data from
national accounts

Bilateral Goods
Exports/Imports

DOTS

Average of values reported
by the reporter and partner
countries

None in the sample

Original data at monthly
frequency, aggregated by sum

External Demand

WEO; DOTS; Haver
Analytics

Export-weighted sum of
partner countries’ real GDP
growth

None in the sample

Seasonally adjusted, quarter over
quarter growth, log difference,
percent

Short-Term
Monetary Policy
Rate

Bloomberg Finance L.P.;
Haver Analytics

Three-month LIBOR,
three-month Treasury bill
rate, where available

Cyprus, Estonia,
Luxembourg, Slovak
Republic, Uruguay

Policy rate, deposit rate, target
rate used where LIBOR and
treasury bill rates were not
available

Output Gap

WEO; Haver Analytics

Gap between real output and
potential output estimated
by HP filter

None in the sample

Denton method used to match
annual output gap numbers in
WEO

Source: IMF staff compilation.
Note: DOTS = IMF, Direction of Trade Statistics; HP = Hodrick-Prescott; LIBOR = London interbank offered rate; WEO = World Economic Outlook.

•• Bilateral goods exports/imports: Bilateral weights are
calculated using bilateral exports/imports of goods
between 55 countries in the sample and five source
countries (5 x 55 = 275 pairs). For each country pair,
the average is that of reported values of both countries.
•• External demand: This is calculated as a weighted
sum of partner countries’ real growth based on bilateral export weights.
•• Short-term interest rate: The three-month London
interbank offered rate (LIBOR) and three-month
Treasury bill rate are used. For more comprehensive
country and historical coverage, policy, deposit, and
target rates are used where three-month LIBOR and
Treasury bill data are not available.

•• Output gap: The quarterly output gap is first calculated as the gap between real output and potential
output, estimated by the Hodrick-Prescott filter.
Then, to reconcile any potential difference between
the estimated output gap and the annual output gap
numbers published in the IMF’s World Economic
Outlook (WEO), the Denton proportional benchmarking method is used. This method both preserves
the seasonality observed from quarterly estimated
output gap series and matches the data published in
the WEO when converted to annual basis.
Variables with notable trends over the sample
period are detrended using country-specific linear

Annex Table 4.1.3. Recipient Countries in Sample
Region
Africa

Countries (55 total)
South Africa

Americas

Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Mexico, Peru, United States,* Uruguay

Asia

Australia, China, India, Indonesia, Japan,* Korea, Malaysia, New Zealand, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam

Europe

Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,* Germany,*
Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Russia, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom*
Source: IMF staff compilation.
*Shock-emitting (source) country. Source country is excluded from the set of recipient countries when analyzing fiscal shocks from the same source.

208

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 4

trends. In addition, outliers—observations with
quarter-over-quarter GDP growth rates higher than
10 percent or lower than –10 percent in any given
quarter (very few observations)—are excluded.

Exchange Rate Regime Classification
A measure of bilateral exchange rate arrangement
vis-à-vis the US dollar is constructed to estimate spillovers for different exchange rate regimes.
For the Reinhart-Rogoff classification, the exchange
rate regime is expressed as a time-varying index
based on the annual coarse de facto classification
from Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2017a, 2017b),
ranging from 1 (most rigid) to 6 (most flexible). For
each period, if a country is assigned a value of 1 (de
facto peg) or 2 (de facto crawling peg), it is deemed
a “fixed regime.” The quarterly index is interpolated
from annual data, assigning the same value for all four
quarters within a year. For example, in 2015, this classification yields seven “fixed” rate countries (Argentina,
China, Costa Rica, India, Peru, Philippines, Vietnam)
out of the sample of 55 countries.43
The IMF pre-2008 classification (coarse) consists of
six categories, with 1 being the most rigid and 6 the
most flexible.44 The classification changed in 2008, and
post-2008 data are obtained from the IMF’s website.
As under the Reinhart-Rogoff classification, a country
is generally classified as having a fixed exchange rate
vis-à-vis the US dollar if it is assigned a value of 1
(de facto peg) or 2 (de facto crawling peg or crawling
band narrower than or equal to ±2 percent). Again,
the quarterly index is interpolated from annual data.
For example, for 2015, this classification yields two
fixed-rate countries (China, Vietnam) out of the sample of 55 countries, although there are more fixed-rate
countries in earlier periods.

Annex 4.2. Empirical Strategy
Baseline Specification
As in Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2013), the
response of output in the recipient country to a fiscal
shock abroad is estimated using the local projections
method. This approach is particularly well suited to
43The

number of countries classified as “fixed” can generally
vary over time given that the exchange rate regime classification is
time varying.
44Data for regime classification before 2008 is from Carmen
Reinhart’s website, http://​www​.carmenreinhart​.com.

Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant?

accommodate nonlinearity; that is, it allows estimation of spillovers under different states of the
economy. Moreover, the method is more robust to
misspecification of the data-generating process than
a vector autoregression, for which the misspecification error is compounded at each horizon of the
impulse response.
The following baseline linear model at time horizon
h (for h = 0, . . . , H) is estimated using a panel ordinary least squares estimator:
​Z​ 

​​  − ​Z​ 
​Yi,t
​  − 1​​

​​

Shock ​​​  ​​
​Yi,t
​  − 1​​

i,t+h
i,t − 1
​​  _________
 ​ = ​α​  h​​ ​ ______it ​ + ​∑ lL= 1​​​ ​β​  hl ​ ​​  Xi,t
​  − l​​ 

+ ​θ​  hi​​  + ​μ​ ht​​  + ​ε​  iht​​,​	

(4.1)

in which ​​Z​ it​​​is the variable of interest (real GDP,
consumption, investment, and the like) in recipient
country i at quarter t, ​​Yit​  ​​​is real GDP in recipient
country i at quarter t, ​Shock ​​​ it​​​is the foreign fiscal
shock facing country i at time t (see below), and ​​X​ it​​​
is a vector of control variables including lags of the
fiscal shock, lags of GDP growth, and lags of external
demand, measured as a weighted average of trading
partner growth rates (the number of lags L = 4 was
chosen). Variables ​​θ​  hi​​​ and ​​μ​ ht​​​capture the country and
time fixed effects. Given that the foreign fiscal shock is
expressed in units of recipient-country GDP (​Shock ​​​ it​​​
is scaled by lagged GDP ​​Y​ it − 1​​​), the coefficient ​​α​  h​​​ is
analogous to a domestic multiplier of an external shock
(Hall 2009; Barro and Redlick 2011). The impulse
response for H periods is constructed from a sequence
of estimates ​​​{​α​  h​​}​​  hH= ​​.
​
0
The baseline fiscal shock combines country-specific
shocks from the five source countries (France, Germany, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and
weights them using trade links with recipient countries. The assumption behind the weighting system
is that fiscal policy is transmitted mainly through
trade—countries with tighter trade links to the source
would be expected to receive larger shocks in the form
of larger changes in export demand, and therefore
larger spillovers. However, the estimated spillovers
capture those from all transmission channels, including
the financial channel. The external fiscal shock facing
recipient country i in time t is given by
M ​​​ ij,t − 1​​ ​s​ jt​​ ​Ej,t
​  − 1​​

______ ​ ​  ______ ​,​	
​Shoc ​kit​  ​​  = ​∑ j5= ​​ ​ 
1​
​  − 1​​
M ​​​ j,t − 1​​ ​Ei,t

(4.2)

in which j denotes source country, ​M ​​​ ijt​​​ is country
j’s goods imports from country i at time t, ​M ​​​ jt​​​ is
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

209

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

total goods imports by country j, ​​s​ jt​​​ is the identified
fiscal shock in country j expressed in real terms in
country j’s currency, and ​​E​ jt​​​ is country j’s US dollar
real exchange rate. Therefore, the second term on
the right side ​​(​s​ jt​​ ​Ej,t
​  − 1​​  / ​Ei,t
​  − 1​​)​​equals the real monetary value of the fiscal shock coming from country
j converted into units of recipient country i’s currency. This term is then scaled by the import share ​​
(M ​​​ ij,t − 1​​  / M ​​​ j,t − 1​​)​​, which captures the relative importance of recipient country i as a supplier of the source
country’s imports.45 Finally, the weighted shocks are
added up across the five source countries.46 The combined shocks are relatively small: for example, spending (tax) shocks average about 0.06 (0.1) percent of
recipient-country GDP over the sample period.

the two different states can then be analyzed by comparing the estimated parameters ​​α​  1h​​​ and ​​α​  2h​​​.
For the source country, only the shock is partitioned
according to the state of the economy, which can be
again either the cyclical position or monetary policy
near the effective lower bound. The states are defined
in the same way as in the specification for recipient
countries. The source-country shock therefore becomes

Nonlinear Specifications

Spillovers to Recipients with Different Exchange
Rate Regimes

Role of Cyclical Conditions and Monetary
Policy Constraints
To study the state-dependent effects for recipient
countries, a nonlinear version of the baseline specification is estimated. Regression coefficients on the
shock and the control variables are allowed to vary
with different states. The state is defined with respect
to the economic cycle (“slack/no slack”) or with respect
to monetary policy stance (“effective lower bound/
no effective lower bound”). Slack corresponds to a negative output gap. Effective lower bound corresponds
to short-term interest rate below the 25th percentile
value of the cross-country distribution, which is about
0.57 percent for advanced economies and 3.0 percent
for emerging market economies.
Following Auerbach and Gorodnichenko
(2013), the baseline specification is modified in the
following way:
​Z​ 

​​  − ​Z​ 
​Yi,t
​  − 1​​

​​

Shoc ​k​  ​​
​Yi,t
​  − 1​​

i,t + h
i,t − 1
​​  __________
 ​ = ​
α​  1h​​ ​Ii,t
​  − 1​​ ​ _____it ​ 

Shoc ​k​  ​​
​Yi,t
​  − 1​​

+ ​α​  2h​​​(1 − ​Ii,t
​  − 1​​)​ ​ _____it ​​
′ ​ ​​I​ 
	​+ ​∑ l4= ​​ ​β​ 
​ i,t − 1​​  X​ 
1​ 1hl

​​ 

i,t − l

′ ​ ​​​​ ​​1 − I​ 
+ ​∑ l4= ​​ ​β​ 
​  ​​ 
(
1​ 2hl
i,t − 1​​​)​​Xi,t
−l

+ ​θ​  hi​​  + ​μ​ ht​​  + ​ε​  iht​​.​	

(4.3)

in which ​​I​ i,t​​​takes the values of either 1 or 0, indicating
the state in recipient country i in period t. Spillovers in
45See

Blagrave and others, forthcoming, for a discussion of alternative weighting systems.
46Estimated fiscal shocks are not correlated across countries.

210

j ​ 
j ​ ​ ​Shock​  j ​​ ,​	
​​Shock​ itj ​ ​  : ​I​ tj ​ ​Shock​ 
(1 − ​It​   ​
− 1​
it ​ + ​
− 1)
it

(4.4)

in which ​​It​  j​  ​​is a {0;1} dummy variable indicating the
state in the shock-emitting country. The assumption
behind interacting only the shock with the state
dummy is that although shocks in the source country
and its domestic response might be regime dependent,
their propagation to recipient countries is not.

Similar to the nonlinear specification in which the
shock is partitioned based on the source country’s
state, the shock is decomposed into two components
according to the bilateral exchange rate arrangement
between recipient ​i​and the United States:
US
US ​ ​ ​Shock​  US
​​Shock​ itUS
​  ​  : ​Fix​ i,tUS− ​ ​Shock​ 
1​
it​  ​+ ​(1 − ​Fix​ i,t − ​
1)
it​  ​,

​		

(4.5)

in which ​​Fix​ itjUS
​  ​  = 1​if country ​i​and the United States
share a fixed regime in period ​t​.
Spillover Estimates Expressed in Terms of
Source-Country GDP
While the baseline specification expresses fiscal
shocks in terms of recipient-country GDP—given the
decision to combine shocks from different sources
and following standard practice in the literature—this
transformation might complicate the interpretation of
the magnitude of spillovers. To facilitate the interpretation, the estimates presented in the chapter are rescaled
as spillovers in response to a 1 percent of source country
GDP fiscal shock. This is done by normalizing the
estimated spillover coefficient ​α​in the following way:
​Mi,j
​  ​​ ​Yj​  ​​

​Spil ​li,j
​  ​​  = ​S​  j___
​​​   ​ ​ __ ​α,​	
​Mj​  ​​ ​Yi​  ​​

(4.6)

in which ​​S​  j​​​ is the source-country shock as a percent
of its own GDP (assumed to be 1); (​​ ​Mi,j
​  ​​  / ​Mj​  ​​)​​ is the
recipient country’s share in the source country’s total
imports (the weighting factor in the baseline model);

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 4

and ​​(​Yj​  ​​  / ​Yi​  ​​)​​is the ratio of source to recipient-country
GDP—both measured in US dollars.47

Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant?

Annex Figure 4.3.1. Effects of Spending and Tax Shock on
Recipient Countries’ Output: Comparison with Panel Vector
Autoregression
(Percent; quarters on x-axis)

Annex 4.3. Robustness Tests
To ensure that the baseline results are not driven by
the selected shock identification scheme or econometric approach, this section performs several robustness
checks. The results are robust to (1) estimation of
spillovers using a panel vector autoregression, which
accounts for the endogenous response of exchange rates
and monetary policy in recipient countries; and (2) the
use of alternative fiscal shocks based on forecast error
and narrative approaches.

Analysis in a panel vector autoregression is conducted to ensure that the results are not driven by the
choice of the local projections method. A panel vector
autoregression explicitly takes into account the endogenous response of key macro variables when estimating
spillovers from a fiscal shock. The following six-variable
panel vector autoregression model is estimated:
(4.7)

in which ​​c​ i​​​is a vector of country-specific fixed effects, ​​
A​  p​​​ is a reduced-form coefficient matrix, ​​µ​  i,t​​​ is a vector
of shock terms, and ​​Y​ i,t​​​is a vector of six endogenous variables:
​​Y = ​{​​Gshock; Tshock; effective ext . demand;
GDP growth; interest rate; REER​}​​​​.
With the exceptions of Gshock and Tshock, which are
identical to the weighted shocks used in the baseline
analysis presented in equation 4.1, each variable is
in (detrended) quarter-over-quarter growth rates and
relates to the recipient country i’s domestic economy.48
The sample period is the same as in the baseline local
projections analysis.
Panel vector autoregression analysis confirms the
findings from the baseline regression model esti47Plausible

alternative weighting systems of the source-country
shock would deliver the same results in terms of source-country
GDP. Alternative weighting systems would also require recalculating
the spillover coefficient estimated in the baseline (​​α​)​, resulting in an
equal and offsetting adjustment of this coefficient, given that any
transformation applied to the source shock would be constant across
all recipient countries.
48Results from the panel vector autoregression are robust to several
alternative specifications, including not detrending the data.

Panel vector autoregression

0.5 1. Output Effects of Spending Shock
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
–0.1
0

Estimation with a Panel Vector Autoregression

​​Yi,t
​  ​​  = ​c​ i​​  + ​∑ p1 = 0​​​ ​A​  p​​ ​Y​  i,t − p​​  + ​μ​  i,t​​,​

Local projection method

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

4

5

6

7

8

0.2 2. Output Effects of Tax Shock
0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
0

1

2

3

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: t = 0 is the quarter of respective shocks. Solid blue lines denote the baseline
response to respective shocks using local projection method; dashed lines denote
90 percent conﬁdence bands; and solid red lines represent the response to
respective shocks using panel vector autoregressions. Shocks are normalized to an
average of 1 percent of GDP across source countries.

mated with the local projections method. The results,
expressed in terms of the cumulative impulse response
following a 1 percent of source-country GDP shock
to government spending (tax revenue), are presented
in Annex Figure 4.3.1 (red line). Spillovers from an
increase in government spending at the source are
larger than spillovers from a tax cut. The results are
statistically different from zero at the 5 percent level,
based on simulations conducted using standard (Monte
Carlo) resampling methods.

Identification Using Forecast Errors
The second robustness check focuses on the identification of fiscal shocks. The alternative methodology
identifies shocks as forecast errors (the difference
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

211

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Annex Figure 4.3.2. Effects of Spending and Tax Shock on
Recipient Countries’ Output: Forecast Errors

sample from 2000 to 2012.49 The forecast error for
each variable ​X = ​
{G, T, Y}​​is constructed as

(Percent; years on x-axis)

​​FE​ tX​  ​ = ​Xt​  ​​  − ​X​ t​f| ​​
​​t − 1​ ,

0.8 1. Output Effects of Spending Shock
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
0

1

2

3

4

5

3

4

5

0.2 2. Output Effects of Tax Shock
0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.4
0

1

2

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: t = 0 is the year of respective shocks. Solid lines denote the response to
respective shocks, and dashed lines denote 90 percent conﬁdence bands. Effects
are estimated based on shocks derived from forecast errors. Shocks are
normalized to an average of 1 percent of GDP across source countries.

between actual variable and its forecast from the
previous period) in the growth rates of government
spending or tax revenues, this way capturing only
unanticipated fiscal changes. This differs from the
structural shocks used in the baseline analysis, which
are based on actual changes in fiscal variables and
can be anticipated by agents if they were announced
earlier. The presence of such anticipated shocks could
bias the estimates because the information set of the
econometrician is different from the information set
of the agents. Because forecast errors capture unexpected changes, the problem with fiscal foresight
is reduced under this approach, as the information
set of the econometrician and private agents is
more aligned.
The approach uses real-time fiscal projections by
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development and real-time actual data to construct
the forecast error shocks at annual frequency on the
212

(4.8)

in which ​​X​ t​​​is the growth rate of the variable from the
contemporaneous data release and ​​X​ t​f| ​​
​​t − 1​ is the forecast
one period earlier. A positive forecast error means an
expansionary spending shock and a contractionary
tax shock. Following Auerbach and Gorodnichenko
(2013), the forecast errors of spending and taxes are
regressed on the forecast errors of output to take
into account any changes as a result of surprises in
the business cycle. They are also regressed on lagged
macroeconomic variables’ growth rates (GDP, deflator,
investment, government spending or tax revenues) to
account for the portion of the innovation that can be
predicted from past observations. The forecast error
shocks for each source country are then constructed as
residuals from this regression, converted to levels using
base year (2010) expenditures or revenue, and replaced
in equations (4.1) and (4.2).
Spillover analysis using forecast error shocks confirms
the baseline results—that spending shocks have larger
spillovers than tax shocks (Annex Figure 4.3.2)—and
provides a strong robustness check. These shocks are
constructed using an entirely different methodology, a
different database and estimated at a different frequency
than the shocks used in the baseline specification. The
size of spillovers is somewhat larger compared with the
baseline, which can be explained, in part, by a stronger
response of source-country spending and revenues to
forecast error shocks compared with structural shocks
(although these impulse responses are imprecisely estimated because of the small sample).

Identification Using Narrative Approach
To further confirm that the baseline results are not
driven by the shock identification scheme, a robustness check using the narrative tax shocks of Romer
and Romer (2010) is conducted. Several studies in the
literature present narrative fiscal shocks (for example,
DeVries and others 2011), but the data set of Romer
and Romer (2010) is the most suitable for comparison
with the baseline analysis of the chapter given that it
covers both expansion and consolidation episodes.50
49After

2012 the forecast data are not continuous.
shock databases for government spending are much
less common in the literature, which precludes a robustness check of
spillovers from spending shocks based on narrative shocks.
50Narrative

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 4

References

Annex Figure 4.3.3. Effects of US Tax Shock on Recipient
Countries’ Output: Comparison with US Narrative Tax Shock,
1995–2007
(Percent; quarters on x-axis)

Shocks identiﬁed using structural vector autoregression
Narrative shock (Romer-Romer)
0.1

0.0

–0.1

–0.2

–0.3
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant?

8

Sources: Romer and Romer (2010); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: t = 0 is the quarter of the US tax shock. Solid blue line denotes the response
to US tax shock using structural vector autoregression; dashed lines denote 90
percent conﬁdence bands; and solid red line represents the response to US
narrative tax shock based on Romer and Romer (2010). Shocks are normalized to
an average of 1 percent of GDP across source countries (note that this will
represent a less than 1 percent of US GDP shock).

The shock is simply replaced in equations (4.1) and
(4.2), with analysis conducted only for the United
States over the period 1995:Q1–2007:Q4 (2007:Q4 is
last period for which the narrative shock is available).
A comparable set of time-sample-modified baseline
results is obtained by estimating spillovers from the
United States on the same sample.
Results presented in Annex Figure 4.3.3 show
similar spillovers from US tax shocks for shocks
identified using a structural vector autoregression
and those coming from the narrative approach.
Although the spillovers identified using the narrative
approach are somewhat smaller compared with the
(time-sample-modified) baseline, they fall comfortably
within the confidence bands of the baseline estimates.
Given that the narrative shocks are based on a completely different identification scheme, these results
provide another strong robustness check.

Aglietta, Michel, and Thomas Brand. 2013. Un New Deal pour
l’Europe. Paris: Éditions Odile Jacob.
Andrle, Michal, Patrick Blagrave, Pedro Espaillat, Keiko Honjo,
Benjamin Hunt, Mika Kortelainen, René Lalonde, Douglas
Laxton, Eleonora Mavroeidi, Dirk Muir, Susanna Mursula,
and Stephen Snudden. 2015. “The Flexible System of Global
Models–FSGM.” IMF Working Paper 15/64, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Auerbach, Alan J., and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2012a. “Fiscal
Multipliers in Recession and Expansion.” In Fiscal Policy after
the Financial Crisis, 63–98. National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
———. 2012b. “Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal Policy.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (2): 1–27.
———. 2013. “Output Spillovers from Fiscal Policy.” American
Economic Review 103 (3): 141–46.
Barro, Robert J., and Charles J. Redlick. 2011. “Macroeconomic
Effects from Government Purchases and Taxes.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 126 (1): 51–102.
Batini, Nicoletta, Luc Eyraud, Lorenzo Forni, and Anke Weber.
2014. “Fiscal Multipliers: Size, Determinants, and Use in
Macroeconomic Projections.” IMF Technical Notes and Manuals 14/4, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Beetsma, Roel, and Massimo Giuliodori. 2004. “What Are the
Spill-Overs from Fiscal Shocks in Europe? An Empirical
Analysis.” ECB Working Paper Series 325, European Central
Bank, Frankfurt.
Beetsma, Roel, Franc Klaassen, and Volker Wieland. 2006.
“Trade Spill-Overs of Fiscal Policy in the European Union: A
Panel Analysis.” Economic Policy 21 (48): 639–87.
Berger, Helge, and Volker Nitsch. 2008. “Zooming Out: The
Trade Effect of the Euro in Historical Perspective.” Journal of
International Money and Finance 27 (8): 1244–60.
Blagrave, Patrick, Giang Ho, Ksenia Koloskova, and Esteban
Vesperoni. Forthcoming. “Fiscal Spillovers—The Importance
of Macroeconomic and Policy Conditions in Transmission.” IMF Spillover Note, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Blanchard, Olivier, Christopher J. Erceg, and Jesper Lindé.
2016. “Jump-Starting the Euro Area Recovery: Would a
Rise in Core Fiscal Spending Help the Periphery?” In NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2016, vol. 31, edited by Martin
Eichenbaum and Jonathan A. Parker. Forthcoming from
University of Chicago Press.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Roberto Perotti. 2002. “An Empirical
Characterization of the Dynamic Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117 (4): 1329–68.
Born, Benjamin, Falko Juessen, and Gernot J. Müller. 2013.
“Exchange Rate Regimes and Fiscal Multipliers.” Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control 37 (2): 446–65.
Bussière, Matthieu, Laurent Ferrera, Michel Juillard, and Daniele
Siena. 2017. “Can Fiscal Budget-Neutral Reforms Stimulate

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

213

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth—Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

Growth? Model-Based Results.” Banque de France Working Paper 625.
Canzoneri Matthew, Fabrice Collard, Harris Dellas, and Behzad
Diba. 2016. “Fiscal Multipliers in Recessions.” Economic
Journal 126 (590): 75–108.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans.
2005. “Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock
to Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political Economy 113 (1): 1–45.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo.
2011. “When Is the Government Spending Multiplier
Large?” Journal of Political Economy 119 (1): 78–121.
Cloyne, James. 2013. “Discretionary Tax Changes and the
Macroeconomy: New Narrative Evidence from the United
Kingdom.” American Economic Review 103 (4): 1507–28.
Cole, Harold L., and Lee E. Ohanian. 2004. “New Deal Policies
and the Persistence of the Great Depression: A General Equilibrium Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy 112 (4): 779–816.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, André Meier, and Gernot J. Müller. 2012.
“What Determines Government Spending Multipliers?”
IMF Working Paper 12/150, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Gernot J. Müller. 2006. “Twin Deficits:
Squaring Theory, Evidence, and Common Sense.” Economic
Policy 21 (48): 598–638.
De Mooij, Ruud, and Sjef Ederveen. 2008. “Corporate Tax
Elasticities: A Reader’s Guide to Empirical Findings.” Oxford
Review of Economic Policy 24 (4): 680–97.
Devereux, Michael P. 2008. “Business Taxation in a Globalized
World.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 24 (4): 625–38.
DeVries, Pete, Jaime Guajardo, Daniel Leigh, and Andrea Pescatori. 2011. “A New Action-Based Dataset of Fiscal Consolidation.” IMF Working Paper 11/128, International Monetary
Fund, Washington, DC.
Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1976. “Expectations and Exchange Rate
Dynamics.” Journal of Political Economy, 84 (6): 1161–76.
Eggertsson, Gauti B. 2011. “What Fiscal Policy Is Effective at
Zero Interest Rates?” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2010,
vol. 25, 59–112. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Enders, Zeno, Gernot J. Müller, and Almuth Scholl. 2011.
“How Do Fiscal and Technology Shocks Affect Real Exchange
Rates?: New Evidence for the United States.” Journal of International Economics 83 (1): 53–69.
Erceg, Christopher J., and Jesper Lindé. 2010. “Is There a Free
Lunch in a Liquidity Trap?” International Finance Discussion
Paper 1003, US Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC.
———. 2013. “Fiscal Consolidation in a Currency Union:
Spending Cuts vs. Tax Hikes.” Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control 37 (2): 422–45.
Fleming, J. Marcus. 1962. “Domestic Financial Policies under
Fixed and under Floating Exchange Rates.” IMF Staff Papers
9 (3): 369–80.
Forni, Mario, and Luca Gambetti. 2016. “Government Spending Shocks in Open Economy VARs.” Journal of International
Economics 99: 68–84.

214

Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Linda L. Tesar.
2012. “The Finnish Great Depression: From Russia with
Love.” American Economic Review 102 (4): 1619–44.
Goujard, Antoine. 2017. “Cross-Country Spillovers from Fiscal
Consolidations.” Fiscal Studies 38 (2): 219–67.
Guajardo, Jaime, Daniel Leigh, and Andrea Pescatori. 2014.
“Expansionary Austerity: International Evidence.” Journal of
the European Economic Association 12 (4): 949–68.
Hall, Robert E. 2009. “By How Much Does GDP Rise If the
Government Buys More Output?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 40 (Fall): 183–249.
Ilzetzki, Ethan, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Carlos A. Vegh. 2013.
“How Big (Small?) Are Fiscal Multipliers?” Journal of Monetary Economics 60 (2): 239–54.
Ilzetzki, Ethan, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff.
2017a. “Exchange Arrangements Entering the 21st Century:
Which Anchor Will Hold?” NBER Working Paper 23134,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
———. 2017b. “The Country Chronologies to Exchange Rate
Arrangements into the 21st Century: Will the Anchor Currency Hold?” NBER Working Paper 23135, National Bureau
of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2016. “Spillovers from
China’s Transition and from Migration.” Chapter 4 in World
Economic Outlook, October.
Jordà, Òscar. 2005. “Estimation and Inference of Impulse
Responses by Local Projections.” American Economic Review
95 (1): 161–82.
Kim, Soyoung, and Nouriel Roubini. 2008. “Twin Deficit or
Twin Divergence? Fiscal Policy, Current Account, and Real
Exchange Rate in the U.S.” Journal of International Economics
74 (2): 362–83.
Kirchner, Markus, Jacopo Cimadomo, and Sebastian Hauptmeier.
2010. “Transmission of Government Spending Shocks in the
Euro Area: Time Variation and Driving Forces.” ECB Working
Paper Series 1219, European Central Bank, Frankfurt.
Klein, Michael W., and Jay C. Shambaugh. 2006. “Fixed
Exchange Rates and Trade.” Journal of International Economics
70 (2): 359–83.
Mertens, Karel, and Morten O. Ravn. 2013. “The Dynamic
Effects of Personal and Corporate Income Tax Changes in the
United States.” American Economic Review 103 (4): 1212–47.
Michaillat, Pascal. 2014. “A Theory of Countercyclical Government Multiplier.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
6 (1): 190–217.
Mineshima, Aiko, Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro, and Anke Weber.
2014. “Size of Fiscal Multipliers.” Post-crisis Fiscal Policy Part
III Chapter 12, 315–72. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Monacelli, Tommaso, and Roberto Perotti. 2010. “Fiscal Policy,
the Real Exchange Rate and Traded Goods.” Economic Journal
120 (544): 437–61.
Mundell, Robert A. 1963. “Capital Mobility and Stabilization
Policy under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates.” Canadian
Journal of Economics and Political Science 29 (4): 475–85.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 4

Nakamura, Emi, and Jon Steinsson. 2014. “Fiscal Stimulus in
a Monetary Union: Evidence from US Regions.” American
Economic Review 104 (3): 753–92.
Nicar, Stephen B. 2015. “International Spillovers from U.S. Fiscal Policy Shocks.” Open Economies Review 26 (5): 1081–97.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1995. “Exchange Rate
Dynamics Redux.” Journal of Political Economy 103 (3): 624–60.
Owyang, Michael, Valerie Ramey, and Sarah Zubairy. 2013. “Are
Government Spending Multipliers Greater during Times of
Slack? Evidence from 20th Century Historical Data.” American Economic Review 103 (2): 129–34.
Poghosyan, Tigran. 2017. “Cross-Country Spillovers of Fiscal
Consolidations in the Euro Area.” IMF Working Paper
17/140, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Popescu, Adina, and Ippei Shibata. Forthcoming. “Spillovers
from US Government Spending Shocks: Impact on External
Positions.” IMF Spillover Note, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Qureshi, Mahvash S., and Charalambos Tsangarides. 2010. “The
Empirics of Exchange Rate Regimes and Trade: Words vs.
Deeds.” IMF Working Paper 10/48, International Monetary
Fund, Washington, DC.
Ramey, Valerie A. 2011. “Identifying Government Spending
Shocks: It’s All in the Timing.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
126 (1): 1–50.

Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant?

———, and Sarah Zubairy. Forthcoming. “Government Spending Multipliers in Good Times and in Bad: Evidence from
US Historical Data,” Journal of Political Economy.
Ravn, Morten O., Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, and Martin
Uribe. 2012. “Consumption, Government Spending, and
the Real Exchange Rate.” Journal of Monetary Economics 59
(3): 215–34.
Reinhart, Carmen, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2004. “The Modern
History of Exchange Rate Arrangements: A Reinterpretation.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (1): 1–48.
Riera-Crichton, Daniel, Carlos A. Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin.
2015. “Procyclical and Countercyclical Fiscal Multipliers:
Evidence from OECD Countries.” Journal of International
Money and Finance 52: 15–31.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2010. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes: Estimates Based on a New
Measure of Fiscal Shocks.” American Economic Review 100
(3): 763–801.
Rose, Andrew K., and Eric van Wincoop. 2001. “National
Money as a Barrier to International Trade: The Real Case
for Currency Union.” American Economic Review 91
(2): 386–90.
Woodford, Michael. 2011. “Simple Analytics of the Government
Expenditure Multiplier.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3 (1): 1–35.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

215

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

T

he Statistical Appendix presents historical data as well as projections. It comprises
seven sections: Assumptions, What’s New,
Data and Conventions, Country Notes,
Classification of Countries, Key Data Documentation,
and Statistical Tables.
The assumptions underlying the estimates and projections for 2017–18 and the medium-term scenario
for 2019–22 are summarized in the first section. The
second section presents a brief description of the
changes to the database and statistical tables since the
April 2017 World Economic Outlook (WEO). The third
section provides a general description of the data and
the conventions used for calculating country group
composites. The fourth section summarizes selected
key information for each country. The classification of
countries in the various groups presented in the WEO
is summarized in the fifth section. The sixth section
provides information on methods and reporting standards for the member countries’ national account and
government finance indicators included in the report.
The last, and main, section comprises the statistical
tables. (Statistical Appendix A is included here; Statistical Appendix B is available online.) Data in these
tables have been compiled on the basis of information
available through September 22, 2017. The figures
for 2017 and beyond are shown with the same degree
of precision as the historical figures solely for convenience; because they are projections, the same degree
of accuracy is not to be inferred.

Assumptions
Real effective exchange rates for the advanced economies are assumed to remain constant at their average
levels measured during the period July 20 to August
17, 2017. For 2017 and 2018, these assumptions
imply average US dollar–special drawing right (SDR)
conversion rates of 1.385 and 1.409, US dollar–euro
conversion rates of 1.128 and 1.176, and yen–US dollar
conversion rates of 111.4 and 109.1, respectively.
It is assumed that the price of oil will average $50.28 a
barrel in 2017 and $50.17 a barrel in 2018.
Established policies of national authorities are
assumed to be maintained. The more specific policy

assumptions underlying the projections for selected
economies are described in Box A1.
With regard to interest rates, it is assumed that the
London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) on six-month
US dollar deposits will average 1.4 percent in 2017
and 1.9 percent in 2018, that three-month euro deposits will average –0.3 percent in 2017 and 2018, and
that six-month yen deposits will average 0.1 percent in
2017 and 0.2 percent in 2018.
As a reminder, with respect to introduction of the
euro, on December 31, 1998, the Council of the European Union decided that, effective January 1, 1999,
the irrevocably fixed conversion rates between the euro
and currencies of the member countries adopting the
euro are as follows:
1 euro

=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=

13.7603
40.3399
0.585274
1.95583
15.6466
5.94573
6.55957
340.750
0.787564
1,936.27
0.702804
3.45280
40.3399
0.42930
2.20371
200.482
30.1260
239.640
166.386

Austrian schillings
Belgian francs
Cyprus pound1
Deutsche marks
Estonian krooni2
Finnish markkaa
French francs
Greek drachmas3
Irish pound
Italian lire
Latvian lat4
Lithuanian litas5
Luxembourg francs
Maltese lira1
Netherlands guilders
Portuguese escudos
Slovak koruna6
Slovenian tolars7
Spanish pesetas

1Established

on January 1, 2008.
on January 1, 2011.
3Established on January 1, 2001.
4Established on January 1, 2014.
5Established on January 1, 2015.
6Established on January 1, 2009.
7Established on January 1, 2007.
2Established

See Box 5.4 of the October 1998 WEO for details on
how the conversion rates were established.
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

217

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

What’s New
•• Data for Somalia are included in the emerging
market and developing economies group composites,
enlarging the database to a total of 193 countries.
Somalia is classified as a member of the Middle East
and North Africa region.
•• Starting with the October 2017 WEO, the real GDP
per capita data in Statistical Tables A1, B1, and B2 are
shown at purchasing power parity. This differs from the
treatment of these data in the April 2017 WEO and
earlier issues, in which the data were shown in local
national currency.

Data and Conventions
Data and projections for 193 economies form the statistical basis of the WEO database. The data are maintained
jointly by the IMF’s Research Department and regional
departments, with the latter regularly updating country
projections based on consistent global assumptions.
Although national statistical agencies are the ultimate
providers of historical data and definitions, international
organizations are also involved in statistical issues, with the
objective of harmonizing methodologies for the compilation of national statistics, including analytical frameworks,
concepts, definitions, classifications, and valuation procedures used in the production of economic statistics. The
WEO database reflects information from both national
source agencies and international organizations.
Most countries’ macroeconomic data presented in the
WEO conform broadly to the 1993 version of the System
of National Accounts (SNA). The IMF’s sector statistical
standards—the sixth edition of the Balance of Payments
and International Investment Position Manual (BPM6), the
Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual and Compilation Guide (MFSMCG), and the Government Finance
Statistics Manual 2014 (GFSM 2014)—have been or are
being aligned with the SNA 2008. These standards reflect
the IMF’s special interest in countries’ external positions,
financial sector stability, and public sector fiscal positions.
The process of adapting country data to the new standards
begins in earnest when the manuals are released. However,
full concordance with the manuals is ultimately dependent
on the provision by national statistical compilers of revised
country data; hence, the WEO estimates are only partially
adapted to these manuals. Nonetheless, for many countries
the impact, on major balances and aggregates, of conversion to the updated standards will be small. Many other
countries have partially adopted the latest standards and
will continue implementation over a period of years.1
1 Many countries are implementing the SNA 2008 or European System
of National and Regional Accounts (ESA) 2010, and a few countries use

218

The fiscal gross and net debt data reported in the
WEO are drawn from official data sources and IMF staff
estimates. While attempts are made to align gross and net
debt data with the definitions in the GFSM, as a result of
data limitations or specific country circumstances, these
data can sometimes deviate from the formal definitions.
Although every effort is made to ensure the WEO data
are relevant and internationally comparable, differences
in both sectoral and instrument coverage mean that the
data are not universally comparable. As more information becomes available, changes in either data sources or
instrument coverage can give rise to data revisions that can
sometimes be substantial. For clarification on the deviations in sectoral or instrument coverage, please refer to the
metadata for the online WEO database.
Composite data for country groups in the WEO are
either sums or weighted averages of data for individual
countries. Unless noted otherwise, multiyear averages of
growth rates are expressed as compound annual rates of
change.2 Arithmetically weighted averages are used for
all data for the emerging market and developing economies group except data on inflation and money growth,
for which geometric averages are used. The following
conventions apply:
•• Country group composites for exchange rates, interest
rates, and growth rates of monetary aggregates are
weighted by GDP converted to US dollars at market
exchange rates (averaged over the preceding three
years) as a share of group GDP.
•• Composites for other data relating to the domestic economy, whether growth rates or ratios, are
weighted by GDP valued at purchasing power parity
as a share of total world or group GDP.3 Annual
inflation rates are simple percentage changes from the
previous years, except in the case of emerging market
and developing economies, for which the rates are
based on logarithmic differences.
•• Composites for real GDP per capita in purchasing
power parity terms are sums of individual country
versions of the SNA older than that from 1993. A similar adoption pattern is expected for the BPM6 and GFSM 2014. Please refer to Table G,
which lists the statistical standards adhered to by each country.
2 Averages for real GDP and its components, employment, inflation, factor productivity, trade, and commodity prices are calculated
based on the compound annual rate of change, except in the case of
GDP per capita and the unemployment rate, which are based on the
simple arithmetic average.
3 See “Revised Purchasing Power Parity Weights” in the July 2014
WEO Update for a summary of the revised purchasing-power-parity-based
weights, as well as Box A2 of the April 2004 WEO and Annex IV of the
May 1993 WEO. See also Anne-Marie Gulde and Marianne SchulzeGhattas, “Purchasing Power Parity Based Weights for the World Economic
Outlook,” in Staff Studies for the World Economic Outlook (Washington,
DC: International Monetary Fund, December 1993), 106–23.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

data after conversion to the international dollar in the
years indicated.
•• Unless noted otherwise, composites for all sectors for
the euro area are corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions. Annual data are not
adjusted for calendar-day effects. For data prior to
1999, data aggregations apply 1995 European currency unit exchange rates.
•• Composites for fiscal data are sums of individual
country data after conversion to US dollars at the
average market exchange rates in the years indicated.
•• Composite unemployment rates and employment
growth are weighted by labor force as a share of
group labor force.
•• Composites relating to external sector statistics are
sums of individual country data after conversion to
US dollars at the average market exchange rates in the
years indicated for balance of payments data and at
end-of-year market exchange rates for debt denominated in currencies other than US dollars.
•• Composites of changes in foreign trade volumes and
prices, however, are arithmetic averages of percent
changes for individual countries weighted by the US dollar value of exports or imports as a share of total world
or group exports or imports (in the preceding year).
•• Unless noted otherwise, group composites are computed if 90 percent or more of the share of group
weights is represented.
Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a
few countries that use fiscal years. Please refer to Table
F, which lists the economies with exceptional reporting
periods for national accounts and government finance
data for each country.
For some countries, the figures for 2016 and earlier
are based on estimates rather than actual outturns.
Please refer to Table G, which lists the latest actual outturns for the indicators in the national accounts, prices,
government finance, and balance of payments indicators
for each country.

Country Notes
•• The consumer price data for Argentina before December 2013 reflect the consumer price index (CPI) for
the Greater Buenos Aires Area (CPI-GBA), while from
December 2013 to October 2015 the data reflect the
national CPI (IPCNu). The new government that took
office in December 2015 discontinued the IPCNu,
stating that it was flawed, and released a new CPI for
the Greater Buenos Aires Area on June 15, 2016 (a new
national CPI has been disseminated starting in June
2016). At its November 9, 2016, meeting, the IMF
Executive Board considered the new CPI series to be in

line with international standards and lifted the declaration of censure issued in 2013. Given the differences in
geographical coverage, weights, sampling, and methodology of these series, the average CPI inflation for
2014, 2015, and 2016 and end-of-period inflation for
2015 and 2016 are not reported in the October 2017
World Economic Outlook.
•• Argentina’s authorities discontinued the publication
of labor market data in December 2015 and released
new series starting in the second quarter of 2016.
•• Argentina’s and Venezuela’s consumer prices are
excluded from all WEO group aggregates.
•• Greece’s primary balance estimates for 2016 are based
on preliminary excessive deficit procedure (EDP)
data on an accrual basis (ESA 2010) provided by the
National Statistical Service (ELSTAT) as of April 21,
2017. Fiscal data since 2010 are adjusted in line with
program definitions.
•• India’s growth rates of real GDP calculated from
1998 to 2011 are as per national accounts with base
year 2004/05, and thereafter are as per national
accounts with base year 2011/12.
•• Against the background of a civil war and weak
capacities, the reliability of Libya’s data, especially
medium-term projections, is low.
•• Data for Syria are excluded from 2011 onward
because of the uncertain political situation.
•• Projecting the economic outlook in Venezuela, including assessing past and current economic developments
as the basis for the projections, is complicated by the
lack of discussions with the authorities (the last Article
IV consultation took place in 2004), long intervals
in receiving data with information gaps, incomplete
provision of information, and difficulties in interpreting certain reported economic indicators in line with
economic developments. The fiscal accounts include
the budgetary central government and Petróleos de
Venezuela, S.A. (PDVSA), and the fiscal accounts
data for 2016–22 are IMF staff estimates. Revenue
includes the IMF staff’s estimated foreign exchange
profits transferred from the central bank to the
government (buying US dollars at the most appreciated rate and selling at more depreciated rates in a
multitier exchange rate system) and excludes the staff’s
estimated revenue from PDVSA’s sale of PetroCaribe
assets to the central bank. Fiscal accounts for 2010–22
correspond to the budgetary central government and
PDVSA. Fiscal accounts before 2010 correspond to
the budgetary central government, public enterprises
(including PDVSA), Instituto Venezolano de los
Seguros Sociales (IVSS—social security), and Fondo
de Garantía de Depósitos y Protección Bancaria
(FOGADE—deposit insurance).
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

219

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Classification of Countries
Summary of the Country Classification
The country classification in the WEO divides the
world into two major groups: advanced economies
and emerging market and developing economies.4 This
classification is not based on strict criteria, economic
or otherwise, and it has evolved over time. The objective is to facilitate analysis by providing a reasonably
meaningful method of organizing data. Table A provides an overview of the country classification, showing
the number of countries in each group by region and
summarizing some key indicators of their relative size
(GDP valued at purchasing power parity, total exports
of goods and services, and population).
Some countries remain outside the country classification and therefore are not included in the analysis. Cuba
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are
examples of countries that are not IMF members, and
their economies therefore are not monitored by the IMF.

General Features and Composition of Groups in
the World Economic Outlook Classification
Advanced Economies
The 39 advanced economies are listed in Table B.
The seven largest in terms of GDP based on market
exchange rates—the United States, Japan, Germany,
France, Italy, the United Kingdom, and Canada—constitute the subgroup of major advanced economies often
referred to as the Group of Seven (G7). The members
of the euro area are also distinguished as a subgroup.
Composite data shown in the tables for the euro area
cover the current members for all years, even though
the membership has increased over time.
Table C lists the member countries of the European
Union, not all of which are classified as advanced
economies in the WEO.

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
The group of emerging market and developing economies (154) includes all those that are not classified as
advanced economies.
The regional breakdowns of emerging market and
developing economies are Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS), emerging and developing Asia, emerging and
4 As used here, the terms “country” and “economy” do not always
refer to a territorial entity that is a state as understood by international law and practice. Some territorial entities included here are
not states, although their statistical data are maintained on a separate
and independent basis.

220

developing Europe (sometimes also referred to as “central
and eastern Europe”), Latin America and the Caribbean
(LAC), the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan (MENAP), and sub-Saharan Africa (SSA).
Emerging market and developing economies are also
classified according to analytical criteria. The analytical
criteria reflect the composition of export earnings and a
distinction between net creditor and net debtor economies. The detailed composition of emerging market
and developing economies in the regional and analytical
groups is shown in Tables D and E.
The analytical criterion source of export earnings
distinguishes between the categories fuel (Standard
International Trade Classification [SITC] 3) and
nonfuel and then focuses on nonfuel primary products
(SITCs 0, 1, 2, 4, and 68). Economies are categorized
into one of these groups when their main source of
export earnings exceeded 50 percent of total exports on
average between 2012 and 2016.
The financial criteria focus on net creditor economies,
net debtor economies, heavily indebted poor countries
(HIPCs), and low-income developing countries (LIDCs).
Economies are categorized as net debtors when their latest net international investment position, where available,
was less than zero or their current account balance accumulations from 1972 (or earliest available data) to 2016
were negative. Net debtor economies are further differentiated on the basis of experience with debt servicing.5
The HIPC group comprises the countries that are or
have been considered by the IMF and the World Bank
for participation in their debt initiative known as the
HIPC Initiative, which aims to reduce the external debt
burdens of all the eligible HIPCs to a “sustainable” level
in a reasonably short period of time.6 Many of these
countries have already benefited from debt relief and
have graduated from the initiative.
The LIDCs are countries that have per capita
income levels below a certain threshold (currently set
at $2,700 in 2016 as measured by the World Bank’s
Atlas method), structural features consistent with
limited development and structural transformation,
and insufficiently close external financial linkages to be
widely seen as emerging market economies.
5 During 2012–16, 25 economies incurred external payments
arrears or entered into official or commercial bank debt-rescheduling
agreements. This group is referred to as economies with arrears and/or
rescheduling during 2012–16.
6 See David Andrews, Anthony R. Boote, Syed S. Rizavi, and Sukwinder Singh, Debt Relief for Low-Income Countries: The Enhanced
HIPC Initiative, IMF Pamphlet Series 51 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, November 1999).

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods and
Services, and Population, 20171
(Percent of total for group or world)

Number of
Economies
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Russia
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India
Excluding China and India
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan
Middle East and North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Excluding Nigeria and South Africa
Analytical Groups3
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by DebtServicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling
during 2012–16
Other Groups
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Low-Income Developing Countries

39
19

16
7

GDP
Advanced
Economies

World

100.0
37.0
28.1
7.9
5.4
4.4
3.4
10.4
5.5
3.3
15.6

41.8
15.5
11.7
3.3
2.3
1.9
1.4
4.4
2.3
1.4
6.5

74.1

31.0

Exports of Goods
and Services
Advanced
Economies
World
100.0
16.6
41.2
12.1
5.7
4.2
3.1
6.1
5.6
3.6
26.9

64.4
10.7
26.5
7.8
3.7
2.7
2.0
3.9
3.6
2.3
17.3

53.8

Population
Advanced
Economies
World
100.0
30.5
31.9
7.8
6.1
5.7
4.4
12.0
6.2
3.4
16.0

14.5
4.4
4.6
1.1
0.9
0.8
0.6
1.7
0.9
0.5
2.3

34.7

71.7

10.4

World

Emerging
Market and
Developing
Economies

World

Emerging
Market and
Developing
Economies

World

58.2

100.0

35.6

100.0

85.5

7.8
5.5
54.3
30.5
12.4
11.4
6.1
13.5
4.5
3.3

4.5
3.2
31.6
17.7
7.2
6.6
3.5
7.8
2.6
1.9

6.9
4.5
50.1
30.0
6.0
14.1
9.8
14.2
3.0
5.4

2.5
1.6
17.8
10.7
2.2
5.0
3.5
5.1
1.1
1.9

4.6
2.3
56.9
22.2
20.9
13.8
2.8
9.9
3.3
2.0

3.9
2.0
48.6
19.0
17.8
11.8
2.4
8.4
2.8
1.7

23
21
45
43

13.2
11.7
5.2
2.6

7.7
6.8
3.0
1.5

14.7
14.3
4.3
2.5

5.2
5.1
1.5
0.9

10.7
7.1
15.1
11.3

9.2
6.0
12.9
9.7

28
125
31

18.6
81.4
4.6

10.8
47.3
2.7

20.2
79.8
4.7

7.2
28.4
1.7

11.7
88.3
7.9

10.0
75.5
6.7

121

49.6

28.9

46.2

16.5

66.8

57.1

25

3.3

1.9

2.1

0.8

5.5

4.7

39
59

2.4
7.2

1.4
4.2

1.9
6.6

0.7
2.3

11.3
22.5

9.7
19.2

Emerging
Market and
Developing
Economies
154

100.0

12
30

28
12
32

1The GDP shares are based on the purchasing-power-parity valuation of economies’ GDP. The number of economies comprising each group reflects those
for which data are included in the group aggregates.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of
geography and similarity in economic structure.
3Syria is omitted from the source of export earnings and South Sudan and Syria are omitted from the net external position group composites because of
insufficient data.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

221

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup
Major Currency Areas
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Euro Area
Austria
Belgium
Cyprus
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany

Greece
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta

Netherlands
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Spain

Major Advanced Economies
Canada
France
Germany

Italy
Japan
United Kingdom

United States

Other Advanced Economies
Australia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Hong Kong SAR1
Iceland
Israel

Korea
Macao SAR2
New Zealand
Norway
Puerto Rico
San Marino

Singapore
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan Province of China

1On

July 1, 1997, Hong Kong was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a Special
Administrative Region of China.
2On December 20, 1999, Macao was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a
Special Administrative Region of China.

Table C. European Union
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France

222

Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Netherlands

Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source of Export Earnings
Fuel

Nonfuel Primary Products

Azerbaijan
Kazakhstan
Russia
Turkmenistan1

Uzbekistan

Brunei Darussalam
Timor-Leste

Lao P.D.R.
Marshall Islands
Mongolia
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Tuvalu

Bolivia
Ecuador
Trinidad and Tobago
Venezuela

Argentina
Chile
Guyana
Honduras
Paraguay
Suriname
Uruguay

Algeria
Bahrain
Iran
Iraq
Kuwait
Libya
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen

Afghanistan
Mauritania
Sudan

Angola
Chad
Republic of Congo
Equatorial Guinea
Gabon
Nigeria
South Sudan

Burkina Faso
Burundi
Central African Republic
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Eritrea
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Liberia
Malawi
Mali
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Zambia

Commonwealth of Independent States

Emerging and Developing Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean

Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan

Sub-Saharan Africa

1Turkmenistan, which is not a member of the Commonwealth of Independent States, is included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in
economic structure.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

223

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, and Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
and Low-Income Developing Countries
Net External
Position1

Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries2

Low-Income
Developing
Countries
Albania

*
•
*
*
*
*
*
•
*
•
*
•

Azerbaijan
Belarus
Georgia3
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyz Republic
Moldova
Russia
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan3
Ukraine3
Uzbekistan

Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Hungary

Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
Fiji
India
Indonesia
Kiribati
Lao P.D.R.
Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nauru
Nepal
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vietnam

Kosovo

*
*

FYR Macedonia

*

Poland

Montenegro
Romania
Serbia

*

Turkey

*
*
•
*
•
*
*
*
•
*
•
*
*
•
*
*
*
•
•
*
*
*
*
*
*
•
*
*
*
*

Antigua and Barbuda

*
*

Argentina

*

Barbados

The Bahamas
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile

*
*

Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador

*
*
*

Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico

*

Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay

*

Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the
Grenadines

*

Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela

224

Low-Income
Developing
Countries

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

Latin America and the Caribbean

Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh

Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries2

Emerging and Developing Europe

Commonwealth of Independent States
Armenia

Net External
Position1

*
•
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
•
*
•

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

•

•
•
•

*
*

•

*

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, and Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
and Low-Income Developing Countries (continued)
Net External
Position1

Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries2

Low-Income
Developing
Countries

Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Afghanistan
Algeria
Bahrain
Djibouti
Egypt
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Sudan
Syria4
Tunisia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen

•
•
•
*
*
•
•
*
•
*
•
*
*
•
*
•
•
*
*
...
*
•
*

•

*

Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros

•
*
•
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

Republic of Congo
Côte d’Ivoire

*

Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau

•

*

Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali

*
*

*
*

Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria

*

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola

Democratic Republic of
the Congo

Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal

•

*

•
•

*
*

•
•
•
•

*
*
*
*

Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
South Sudan4
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Net External
Position1

Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries2

Low-Income
Developing
Countries

*
*
*
*
*
*
•
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
•
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
•
...
*
*
*
*
*
*

•
•
•

*
*
*

*
•

*
*

•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

•

*

•
•
•
•

*
*
*
*
*

•

*
*

•
•
•
•

*
*
*
*
*

1Dot

(star) indicates that the country is a net creditor (net debtor).
2Dot instead of star indicates that the country has reached the completion point, which allows it to receive the full debt relief committed to at the decision point.
3Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in
economic structure.
4South Sudan and Syria are omitted from the net external position group composite for lack of a fully developed database.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

225

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods1
National Accounts
The Bahamas
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belize
Bhutan
Jul/Jun
Botswana
Dominica
Egypt
Jul/Jun
Ethiopia
Jul/Jun
Haiti
Oct/Sep
Hong Kong SAR
India
Apr/Mar
Iran
Apr/Mar
Jamaica
Lesotho
Apr/Mar
Malawi
Marshall Islands
Oct/Sep
Mauritius
Micronesia
Oct/Sep
Myanmar
Apr/Mar
Namibia
Nauru
Jul/Jun
Nepal
Aug/Jul
Pakistan
Jul/Jun
Palau
Oct/Sep
Puerto Rico
Jul/Jun
St. Lucia
Samoa
Jul/Jun
Singapore
Swaziland
Thailand
Trinidad and Tobago
1Unless noted otherwise, all data refer to calendar years.

226

Government Finance
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Aug/Jul
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation
National Accounts

Country
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and
Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
The Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and
Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African
Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Costa Rica

Currency
Afghan afghani
Albanian lek
Algerian dinar
Angolan kwanza
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Argentine peso
Armenian dram
Australian dollar
Euro
Azerbaijan manat
Bahamian dollar
Bahrain dinar
Bangladesh taka
Barbados dollar
Belarusian ruble
Euro
Belize dollar
CFA franc
Bhutanese
ngultrum
Bolivian boliviano
Bosnia convertible
marka
Botswana pula
Brazilian real
Brunei dollar
Bulgarian lev
CFA franc
Burundi franc

Prices (CPI)

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2015
2016
2016
2015
2016

Base Year2
2002/03
1996
2001
2002
20066

System of
National
Accounts
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 1995
SNA 1993

2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2015
2016
2016
2014
2016
2016
2015
2015
2015/16

2004
2005
2014/15
2010
2003
2006
2010
2005
19746
2014
2014
2000
2007
20006

SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO

2015
2016

1990
2010

Other
ESA 2010

NSO
NSO
NSO and GAD
NSO
NSO and MEP
NSO

2015
2016
2016
2016
2016
2015

2006
1995
2010
2010
1999
2005

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
IMF staff
NSO
MEP
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO and CB
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO

Cabo Verdean
escudo
Cambodian riel
CFA franc
Canadian dollar
CFA franc

NSO

2016

2007

SNA 2008

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2016
2016
2016
2012

2000
2000
2007
2005

SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993

CFA franc
Chilean peso
Chinese yuan
Colombian peso
Comorian franc
Congolese franc

CB
CB
NSO
NSO
MEP
NSO

2015
2016
2016
2016
2015
2015

2005
20136
2015
2005
2000
2005

Other
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
Other
Other
SNA 1993

CFA franc
Costa Rican colón

NSO
CB

2016
2016

1990
2012

SNA 1993
SNA 2008

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3
From 1996
From 2005

From 1980
From 1995
From 1994

From 2005
From 1995

From 2000

From 1996

From 2011

From 1980

From 2003
From 2000

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
CB

2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2015
2016
2015/16

NSO
NSO

2016
2016

NSO
NSO
NSO and GAD
NSO
NSO
NSO

2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016

NSO

2016

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2016
2016
2016
2015

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB

2015
2016
2016
2016
2015
2015

NSO
CB

2016
2016

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

Latest
Actual
Annual Data
2015
2016
2016
2015
2016

227

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2015
2016

Statistics
Manual
in Use at
Source
BPM 5
BPM 6

CB
CB
CB

2016
2015
2016

BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6

C
C
A
A
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
Mixed
C
C
C

NSO
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB

2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2015
2016
2016
2016
2015
2015
2014/15
2016

BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6

Mixed

CB

2016

BPM 6

C
C

CB
CB

2015
2016

BPM 5
BPM 6

Other
2001
2001
2001
2001
1986
2001
2001
2001

CG
CG,SG,LG,SS,
MPC,NFPC
CG,BCG
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG
CG,LG
CG,NFPC
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG

C
C
CB
A
A
A
C
A
C

NSO, MEP, and GAD
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
MoF
NSO
CB

2015
2016
2016
2015
2016
2016
2016
2016
2015

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5

2015
2016
2016
2015
2016
2015

1986
2001
2001
2001
1986
2001

CG,NFPC
CG,LG
CG,LG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG

C
A
C
Other
Mixed
A

CB
CB
GAD
CB and NSO
CB and IMF staff
CB

2015
2016
2016
2015
2016
2015

BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5

2016
2016

2001
1986

CG
CG

A
C

CB
CB

2015
2016

BPM 5
BPM 6

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2015
2016

Statistics
Manual in
Use at Source
2001
1986

MoF
MoF
MoF

2016
2015
2016

1986
2001
2001

MEP
MoF
MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
CB
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

2016
2016
2015
2016
2015
2016/17
2016
2015/16
2016/17
2016
2016
2015/16
2016
2015/16
2016

1986
2001
2014
2001
Other
2001
2001
Other
1986
2001
ESA 2010
1986
1986
1986
2001

Bosnia and
Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil

MoF

2015

2001

MoF
MoF

2015/16
2016

1986
2001

Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African
Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Costa Rica

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

2016
2015
2016
2015
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF and CB

Country
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and
Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
The Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia

228

Historical Data
Source1
MoF
IMF staff

Balance of Payments

Subsectors
Coverage4

Accounting
Practice5
C
Other

Historical Data
Source1
NSO, MoF, and CB
CB

C
Other
C

CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG,SG,LG,TG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG,MPC
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS,NMPC,
NFPC
CG,SG,LG,SS

CG
CG,LG,SS,MPC,
NFPC
CG
CG,LG
CG

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts

Country
Côte d'Ivoire
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

Prices (CPI)

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2014
2016
2016
2016
2015
2014
2015

Base Year2
2009
2010
2005
2010
2010
1990
2006

System of
National
Accounts
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
Other
SNA 1993

Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia

Currency
CFA franc
Croatian kuna
Euro
Czech koruna
Danish krone
Djibouti franc
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Dominican peso
US dollar
Egyptian pound
US dollar
CFA franc
Eritrean nakfa
Euro

CB
CB
MEP
CB
MEP and CB
IMF staff
NSO

2016
2016
2015/16
2016
2016
2006
2016

2007
2007
2011/12
1990
2006
2005
2010

SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
Other
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010

Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
The Gambia
Georgia

Ethiopian birr
Fijian dollar
Euro
Euro
CFA franc
Gambian dalasi
Georgian lari

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
MoF
NSO
NSO

2015/16
2016
2016
2016
2015
2016
2016

2010/11
20116
2010
2010
2001
2004
2000

SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2016
2016
2016
2015

2010
2006
2010
2006

ESA 2010
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993

CB

2016

2001

SNA 1993

Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong SAR
Hungary
Iceland

Euro
Ghanaian cedi
Euro
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Guatemalan
quetzal
Guinean franc
CFA franc
Guyanese dollar
Haitian gourde
Honduran lempira
Hong Kong dollar
Hungarian forint
Icelandic króna

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO

2011
2015
2016
2015/16
2016
2016
2016
2016

2003
2005
20066
1986/87
2000
2014
2005
2005

SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
ESA 2010

India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica

Indian rupee
Indonesian rupiah
Iranian rial
Iraqi dinar
Euro
New Israeli shekel
Euro
Jamaican dollar

NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2016/17
2016
2015/16
2014
2016
2016
2016
2015

2011/12
2010
2011/12
2007
2015
2015
2010
2007

SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1968
ESA 2010
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
SNA 1993

Guatemala

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3

From 1995
From 1995
From 1980

From 2007

From 2010

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO and CB
NSO
NSO
MEP
NSO
NSO

Latest
Actual
Annual Data
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2015
2016
2016
2015/16
2016
2016
2009
2016

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2016
2015
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2016
2016
2016
2016

From 2001

NSO

2016

From 1980
From 2005
From 1990

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
IEO
NSO

2016
2016
2016
2015/16
2016
2016
2016
2016

NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2016/17
2016
2015/16
2014
2016
2016
2016
2015

From 1980
From 1980

From 1996
From 1991
From 1995

From 1995
From 1995
From 1980

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

229

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance

Country
Côte d'Ivoire
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
The Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong SAR
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica

230

Historical Data
Source1
MoF
MoF
NSO
MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
CB and MoF
MoF
MoF and CB
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
NSO
IMF staff
MoF
MoF
NSO
MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
NSO
MEP and NSO
NSO
MoF and IMF staff
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF and NSO
MoF and NSO
NSO
MoF

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2015/16
2016
2016
2015/16
2016
2016
2008
2016
2015/16
2015
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2015
2016
2016
2014
2016
2015/16
2016
2016/17
2016
2016
2015/16
2016
2015/16
2014
2016
2016
2016
2015/16

Statistics
Manual in
Use at Source
1986
2001
ESA 2010
2001
2001
2001
1986
2001
1986
2001
1986
1986
2001
1986/2001
1986
1986
2001
2001
2001
1986
2001
2001
2001
2014
2001
2001
2001
2001
1986
2001
2014
2001
ESA 2010
2001
1986
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
1986

Balance of Payments

Subsectors
Coverage4
CG
CG,LG
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG,SG,LG,SS,NMPC
CG,SG,LG,SS,NFPC
CG,LG,SS,MPC
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG,LG,NFPC
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG,LG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG
CG
CG,SS,NFPC
CG
CG,LG,SS,NFPC
CG
CG,LG,SS,NMPC
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG
CG,LG
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG

Accounting
Practice5
A
A
Other
A
A
A
C
Mixed
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
A
A
C
C
A
C
A
CB
C
Other
A
C
C
A
C
A
A
C
C
C
C
A
Other
A
C

Historical Data
Source1
CB
CB
CB
NSO
NSO
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB and IMF staff
NSO and CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB and MEP
CB
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2015
2016
2016
2016
2015
2016
2015
2016
2016
2015/16
2016
2015
2008
2016
2015/16
2015
2016
2016
2015
2016
2015
2016
2016
2016
2015
2015
2016
2015
2016
2015/16
2015
2016
2015
2016
2016/17
2016
2015/16
2014
2016
2016
2016
2015

Statistics
Manual
in Use at
Source
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts

Country
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea
Kosovo
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao P.D.R.
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macao SAR
FYR Macedonia
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia
Moldova
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nauru
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway

Currency
Japanese yen
Jordanian dinar
Kazakhstani tenge
Kenya shilling
Australian dollar
South Korean won
Euro
Kuwaiti dinar
Kyrgyz som
Lao kip
Euro
Lebanese pound
Lesotho loti
US dollar
Libyan dinar
Euro
Euro
Macanese pataca
Macedonian denar
Malagasy ariary
Malawian kwacha
Malaysian ringgit
Maldivian rufiyaa
CFA franc
Euro
US dollar
Mauritanian
ouguiya
Mauritian rupee
Mexican peso
US dollar
Moldovan leu
Mongolian tögrög
Euro
Moroccan dirham
Mozambican
metical
Myanmar kyat
Namibia dollar
Australian dollar
Nepalese rupee
Euro
New Zealand dollar
Nicaraguan
córdoba
CFA franc
Nigerian naira
Norwegian krone

Historical Data
Source1
GAD
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
MEP and NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
MoF and NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

Prices (CPI)
System of
National
Accounts
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 2008
Other
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
SNA 1968
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3
From 1980

From 1999

2010/11
2000
2006/07
2000/01
2010
2009/10
2006

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 1995
SNA 1993
SNA 1993/
2008
Other
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
Other
SNA 1993

2000
2010
2014

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
ESA 2010

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2016
2016
2016
2016
2015
2016
2015
2015
2015
2016
2016
2013
2015/16
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2015
2011
2016
2015
2016
2016
2015/16
2014

Base Year2
2011
1994
2007
2009
2006
2010
2015
2010
2005
2012
2010
2010
2012/13
1992
2003
2010
2010
2015
2005
2000
2010
2010
2014
1999
2010
2003/04
2004

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2016
2016
2014/15
2016
2016
2015
2016
2016

2006
2008
2004
1995
2010
2006
2007
2009

MEP
NSO
Other
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB

2015/16
2016
2015/16
2015/16
2016
2016
2016

NSO
NSO
NSO

2016
2016
2016

From 1994

From 1980

From 1995
From 2010

From 2005
From 1995
From 2001

From 2000

Historical Data
Source1
GAD
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
MoF
NSO
NSO and MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

Latest
Actual
Annual Data
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2015/16
2014

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2016
2016
2014/15
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016

From 1980
From 1987
From 1994

NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
CB

2015/16
2016
2015/16
2016/17
2016
2016
2016

From 1980

NSO
NSO
NSO

2016
2016
2016

From 1998

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

231

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance

Country
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea
Kosovo
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao P.D.R.
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macao SAR
FYR Macedonia
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia
Moldova
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nauru
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway

232

Historical Data
Source1
GAD
MoF
IMF staff
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MEP
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
NSO and MoF

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2015
2015
2015
2016
2016
2016
2015
2016/17
2016
2016
2015
2016
2015
2016
2016
2015/16
2015
2016
2016
2016
2015/16
2014
2015/16
2016
2014/15
2016
2016
2015
2016
2016
2015/16
2015/16
2015/16
2015/16
2016
2015/16
2016
2015
2016
2016

Statistics
Manual in
Use at Source
2001
2001
2001
2001
1986
2001
Other
1986
Other
2001
1986
2001
2001
2001
1986
2014
2001
2014
1986
1986
1986
1986
1986
2001
2001
2001
1986
2001
2001
2001
1986
2001
1986
2001
2001
Other
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
1986
1986
2001
2014

Subsectors
Coverage4
CG,LG,SS
CG,NFPC
CG,LG
CG
CG,LG
CG
CG,LG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG
CG
CG,SG,LG
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG,SS
CG,SG,SS
CG,LG
CG
CG,SG,LG
CG
CG
CG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG,NFPC
CG,SS,NMPC,NFPC
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,SG
CG,NFPC
CG
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,SG,LG
CG,LG,SS

Balance of Payments

Accounting
Practice5
A
C
A
A
C
C
C
Mixed
C
C
C
Mixed
C
A
C
A
A
C
C
C
C
C
C
Mixed
A
A
C
C
C
Other
C
C
C
A
Mixed
Mixed
C
Mixed
C
A
A
C
A
C
A

Historical Data
Source1
MoF
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB and IMF staff
CB
CB
CB
CB
NSO
NSO
CB
CB
NSO and GAD
NSO
CB
CB
NSO
NSO
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB
GAD
CB
IMF staff
CB
IMF staff
CB
CB
NSO
IMF staff
CB
CB
NSO

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2016
2016
2016
2016
2014
2016
2015
2016
2016
2016
2016
2015
2016/17
2015
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2015/16
2013
2016
2016
2014/15
2016
2016
2015
2016
2015
2015/16
2015
2014/15
2015/16
2016
2016
2016
2015
2016
2016

Statistics
Manual
in Use at
Source
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
Other
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts

Country
Oman
Pakistan

Currency
Omani rial
Pakistan rupee

Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea

US dollar
US dollar
Papua New Guinea
kina
Paraguayan
guaraní
Peruvian nuevo sol
Philippine peso
Polish zloty
Euro
US dollar
Qatari riyal
Romanian leu
Russian ruble
Rwandan franc
Samoa tala
Euro
São Tomé and
Príncipe dobra
Saudi riyal
CFA franc
Serbian dinar
Seychellois rupee
Sierra Leonean
leone
Singapore dollar
Euro
Euro
Solomon Islands
dollar
US dollar
South African rand
South Sudanese
pound
Euro
Sri Lankan rupee
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Sudanese pound
Surinamese dollar

Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Qatar
Romania
Russia
Rwanda
Samoa
San Marino
São Tomé and
Príncipe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Spain
Sri Lanka
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the
Grenadines
Sudan
Suriname

Prices (CPI)

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2015
2015/16

Base Year2
2010
2005/066

2015/16
2015
2013

2004/05
2007
1998

System of
National
Accounts
SNA 1993
SNA 1968/
1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

2016

1994

CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO and MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2016
2016
2016
2016
2014/15
2015
2016
2016
2016
2015/16
2015
2015

NSO and MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
MoF
NSO
NSO and MoF

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO

Latest
Actual
Annual Data
2016
2016/17

MoF
NSO
NSO

2015/16
2015
2013

SNA 1993

CB

2016

2007
2000
2010
2011
1954
2013
2010
2016
2014
2009/10
2007
2000

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA1968
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
Other
SNA 1993

CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
MEP
NSO and MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2016
2016
2016
2016
2015/16
2015
2016
2016
2016
2015/16
2016
2016

2016
2016
2016
2015
2016

2010
2000
2010
2006
2006

SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

NSO and MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2016
2016
2016
2016
2016

NSO
NSO
NSO
CB

2016
2016
2016
2016

2010
2010
2010
2004

SNA 1993
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2016
2016
2016
2016

CB
CB
NSO

2015
2016
2015

2015
2010
2010

SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

CB
NSO
NSO

2014
2016
2016

NSO
NSO
NSO

2016
2016
2016

2010
2010
20066

ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO
NSO

2016
2016
2016

NSO

2016

2006

SNA 1993

NSO

2016

NSO

2016

20066

SNA 1993

NSO

2016

NSO
NSO

2010
2015

2007
2007

Other
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO

2015
2016

CB

From 2007

From 1995
From 1980

From 2000
From 1995

From 2010
From 2010
From 2010
From 1997
From 2000

From 1995

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

233

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance

Country
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Qatar
Romania
Russia
Rwanda
Samoa
San Marino
São Tomé and
Príncipe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Spain
Sri Lanka
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the
Grenadines
Sudan
Suriname

234

Balance of Payments

Historical Data
Source1
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2016
2015/16
2015/16
2015
2013
2016

Statistics
Manual in
Use at Source
2001
1986
2001
1986
1986
2001

MoF
MoF
MoF and NSO
NSO
MEP
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF and Customs

2016
2016
2016
2016
2015/16
2015
2016
2016
2016
2015/16
2016
2016

1986
2001
ESA 2010
2001
2001
1986
2001
2001
2001
2001
Other
2001

CG
CG,SG,LG
CG
CG,SG,LG,SS,NFPC
CG
CG,SG,LG,SS,MPC,
NFPC
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
Other
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG,SS
CG,LG
CG
CG
CG

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF and MEP
MoF and NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2015/16
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2015/16
2016

1986
2001
1986/2001
1986
1986
2001
2001
1986
1986
2001
2001
Other
ESA 2010
2001
1986
1986
1986

2015
2015

2001
1986

MoF
MoF

Subsectors
Coverage4

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2015
2015/16
2015/16
2015
2013
2016

Statistics
Manual
in Use at
Source
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5

2016
2016
2016
2016
…
2014
2016
2016
2016
2015/16
…
2016

BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
…
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
…
BPM 6

CB
CB and IMF staff
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB
MoF, NSO, and MEP
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB

2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016

BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6

CB
CB

2015
2016

BPM 5
BPM 5

Accounting
Practice5
C
C
Other
C
C
C

Historical Data
Source1
CB
CB
MoF
NSO
CB
CB

C
C
A
A
A
C
C
Mixed
Mixed
A
Other
C

CB
CB
CB
CB
…
CB and IMF staff
CB
CB
CB
CB
…
CB

CG
CG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG,SS
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG,SG,SS
CG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG
CG

C
C
C
C
C
C
A
C
C
C
C
C
A
C
C
C
C

CG
CG

Mixed
Mixed

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts

Country
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Taiwan Province of
China
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab
Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela

Currency
Swazi lilangeni
Swedish krona
Swiss franc
Syrian pound
New Taiwan dollar
Tajik somoni
Tanzania shilling
Thai baht
US dollar
CFA franc
Tongan pa’anga
Trinidad and
Tobago dollar
Tunisian dinar
Turkish lira
New Turkmen
manat
Australian dollar
Ugandan shilling
Ukrainian hryvnia
U.A.E. dirham

Prices (CPI)

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2015
2016
2016
2010
2015

Base Year2
2011
2016
2010
2000
2011

System of
National
Accounts
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 2008

NSO
NSO
MEP
MoF
NSO
CB
NSO

2016
2016
2016
2015
2013
2016
2016

1995
2007
2002
20156
2000
2010
2000

SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
Other
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO
NSO

2014
2016
2015

2004
2009
2008

SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993

PFTAC advisors
NSO
NSO
NSO

2015
2016
2016
2016

2005
2010
2010
2010

SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
CB

2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016

2013
2009
2005
1995
2006
1997

ESA 2010
Other
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008

Vietnam
Yemen

Pound sterling
US dollar
Uruguayan peso
Uzbek sum
Vanuatu vatu
Venezuelan bolívar
fuerte
Vietnamese dong
Yemeni rial

NSO
IMF staff

2016
2008

2010
1990

SNA 1993
SNA 1993

Zambia
Zimbabwe

Zambian kwacha
US dollar

NSO
NSO

2015
2013

2010
2009

SNA 1993
Other

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3
From 1993
From 1980

From 1993

From 2009
From 2009
From 2000

From 2005

From 1980
From 1980

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
MEP
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO

2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016

NSO
NSO
NSO

2016
2016
2015

NSO
CB
NSO
NSO

2016
2015/16
2016
2016

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB

2016
2016
2016
2016
2016
2016

NSO
NSO,CB, and
IMF staff
NSO
NSO

2016
2009

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

Latest
Actual
Annual Data
2016
2016
2016
2011
2016

2016
2016

235

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance

Country
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Taiwan Province of
China
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab
Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Vietnam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2016/17
2015
2015
2009
2015

Statistics
Manual in
Use at Source
2001
2001
2001
1986
1986

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

2016
2015
2014/15
2015
2016
2016
2015/16
2016
2015
2015
2016
2015
2016
2015

NSO
MEP
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

Historical Data
Source1
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

Balance of Payments

Subsectors
Coverage4

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2016
2016
2016
2009
2015

Statistics
Manual
in Use at
Source
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6

CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB and NSO
CB and NSO
CB
CB
NSO and IMF staff
IMF staff
CB
CB
CB

2016
2015
2016
2016
2016
2015
2016
2016
2016
2013
2013
2015
2016
2016

BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5

A
A
A

NSO
NSO
CB

2016
2016
2016

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6

C
C
C
C
C
C
C

MEP
CB
CB
CB
IMF staff
CB
CB and MoF

2016
2016
2016
2016
2009
2016
2013

BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 4

CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG,SS

Accounting
Practice5
A
A
A
C
C

Historical Data
Source1
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB

1986
1986
2001
2001
2001
2014
1986
1986
2001
1986
Other
2001
2001
2001

CG,LG,SS
CG,LG
CG,BCG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG
CG
CG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG,BCG,SG,SS

C
C
A
C
C
C
C
C
A
C
Mixed
C
C
C

2016
2016
2016

2001
2014
1986

2016
2016
2013
2014
2013
2016
2014

Other
2001
2001
2001
2001
1986
1986

CG,LG
CG,SG,LG
CG,LG,SS,MPC,
NFPC
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
BCG,NFPC
CG,SG,LG
CG,LG
CG
CG

Note: BPM = Balance of Payments Manual; CPI = consumer price index; ESA = European System of National and Regional Accounts; SNA = System of National Accounts.
1CB = central bank; Customs = Customs Authority; GAD = General Administration Department; IEO = international economic organization; MEP = Ministry of Economy, Planning,
Commerce, and/or Development; MoF = Ministry of Finance and/or Treasury; NSO = National Statistics Office; PFTAC = Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre.
2National accounts base year is the period with which other periods are compared and the period for which prices appear in the denominators of the price relationships used to
calculate the index.
3Use of chain-weighted methodology allows countries to measure GDP growth more accurately by reducing or eliminating the downward biases in volume series built on index numbers
that average volume components using weights from a year in the moderately distant past.
4For some countries, the structures of government consist of a broader coverage than specified for the general government. Coverage: BCG = budgetary central government;
CG = central government; LG = local government; MPC = monetary public corporation, including central bank; NFPC = nonfinancial public corporation; NMPC = nonmonetary
financial public corporation; SG = state government; SS = social security fund; TG = territorial governments.
5Accounting standard: A = accrual accounting; C = cash accounting; CB = commitments basis accounting; Mixed = combination of accrual and cash accounting.
6Base year is not equal to 100 because the nominal GDP is not measured in the same way as real GDP or the data are seasonally adjusted.

236

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions Underlying the Projections for Selected Economies
Fiscal Policy Assumptions
The short-term fiscal policy assumptions used in the
World Economic Outlook (WEO) are normally based on
officially announced budgets, adjusted for differences
between the national authorities and the IMF staff
regarding macroeconomic assumptions and projected
fiscal outturns. When no official budget has been
announced, projections incorporate policy measures
that are judged likely to be implemented. The mediumterm fiscal projections are similarly based on a judgment about the most likely path of policies. For cases
in which the IMF staff has insufficient information to
assess the authorities’ budget intentions and prospects
for policy implementation, an unchanged structural
primary balance is assumed unless indicated otherwise.
Specific assumptions used in regard to some of the
advanced economies follow. (See also Tables B5 to B9 in
the online section of the Statistical Appendix for data on
fiscal net lending/borrowing and structural balances.)1
Argentina: Fiscal projections are based on the available information regarding budget outturn and budget
plans for the federal and provincial governments, fiscal
measures announced by the authorities, and IMF staff
macroeconomic projections.
Australia: Fiscal projections are based on Australian
Bureau of Statistics data, the fiscal year 2017/18
budget, and IMF staff estimates.
Austria: Fiscal projections are based on data from
Statistics Austria, the authorities’ projections, and IMF
staff estimates and projections.
Belgium: Projections reflect the IMF staff’s
assessment of policies and measures laid out in the
2017 budget and the 2016–19 Stability Programme,
incorporated into the IMF staff’s macroeconomic
framework.
1 The output gap is actual minus potential output, as a
percentage of potential output. Structural balances are expressed
as a percentage of potential output. The structural balance is the
actual net lending/borrowing minus the effects of cyclical output
from potential output, corrected for one-time and other factors,
such as asset and commodity prices and output composition
effects. Changes in the structural balance consequently include
effects of temporary fiscal measures, the impact of fluctuations
in interest rates and debt-service costs, and other noncyclical
fluctuations in net lending/borrowing. The computations of
structural balances are based on IMF staff estimates of potential
GDP and revenue and expenditure elasticities. (See Annex I of
the October 1993 WEO.) Net debt is calculated as gross debt
minus financial assets corresponding to debt instruments. Estimates of the output gap and of the structural balance are subject
to significant margins of uncertainty.

Brazil: Fiscal projections for the end of 2017 take into
account budget performance through July 31, 2017, and
the deficit target approved in the budget law.
Canada: Projections use the baseline forecasts in
the 2017 federal budget and 2017 provincial budget
updates as available. The IMF staff makes some
adjustments to these forecasts, including for differences
in macroeconomic projections. The IMF staff forecast
also incorporates the most recent data releases from
Statistics Canada’s Canadian System of National
Economic Accounts, including federal, provincial,
and territorial budgetary outturns through the second
quarter of 2017.
Chile: Projections are based on the authorities’
budget projections, adjusted to reflect the IMF staff’s
projections for GDP and copper prices.
China: Projections assume that the pace of fiscal
consolidation is likely to be more gradual, reflecting
reforms to strengthen social safety nets and the social
security system announced as part of the Third Plenum
reform agenda.
Denmark: Estimates for 2016 are aligned with the
latest official budget estimates and the underlying
economic projections, adjusted where appropriate
for the IMF staff’s macroeconomic assumptions. For
2017–18, the projections incorporate key features
of the medium-term fiscal plan as embodied in the
authorities’ Convergence Programme 2016 submitted
to the European Union.
France: Projections for 2017 reflect the budget law
and cancellation of spending taken in July 2017. For
2018–19, they are based on the multiyear budget and
the preliminary fiscal path announced by the new
government in July 2017, adjusted for differences in
assumptions on macro and financial variables, and
revenue projections. Historical fiscal data reflect the
May 2017 revisions and update of the fiscal accounts,
debt data, and national accounts for 2014 and 2015.
Germany: The IMF staff’s projections for 2017 and
beyond are based on the 2017 Stability Programme
Update, adjusted for the differences in the IMF staff’s
macroeconomic framework and assumptions concerning
revenue elasticities. The estimate of gross debt includes
portfolios of impaired assets and noncore business
transferred to institutions that are winding up, as well as
other financial sector and EU support operations.
Greece: The fiscal projections reflect the IMF staff’s
assessment of implementation of legislated fiscal
measures under the IMF and European Stability
Mechanism (ESM) program.
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

237

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Box A1 (continued)
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: Projections
are based on the authorities’ medium-term fiscal
projections on expenditures.
Hungary: Fiscal projections include IMF staff
projections of the macroeconomic framework and of
the impact of recent legislative measures, as well as
fiscal policy plans announced in the 2017 budget.
India: Historical data are based on budgetary
execution data. Projections are based on available
information on the authorities’ fiscal plans, with
adjustments for IMF staff assumptions. Subnational data
are incorporated with a lag of up to two years; general
government data are thus finalized well after central
government data. IMF and Indian presentations differ,
particularly regarding divestment and license auction
proceeds, net versus gross recording of revenues in
certain minor categories, and some public sector lending.
Indonesia: IMF projections are based on moderate
tax policy and administration reforms, fuel subsidy
pricing reforms introduced in January 2015, and a
gradual increase in social and capital spending over the
medium term in line with fiscal space.
Ireland: Fiscal projections are based on the country’s
Budget 2017, Stability Programme Update 2017, and
Summer Economic Statement 2017.
Israel: Historical data are based on Government
Finance Statistics data prepared by the Central Bureau
of Statistics. Projections for 2017 and 2018 are based on
the 2017–18 budget, adjusted for the fiscal impact of
new measures announced in April 2017 (the “Net Family
Plan”) and for one-off revenues in 2017 arising from a
large foreign direct investment transaction (0.3 percent
of GDP). The central government deficit is assumed
to remain at the current ceiling level of 2.9 percent of
GDP in subsequent years, rather than declining in line
with medium-term fiscal targets, consistent with long
experience of revisions to those targets.
Italy: IMF staff estimates and projections are based on
the fiscal plans included in the government’s 2017 budget
and April 2017 Economic and Financial Document.
Japan: The projections include fiscal measures
already announced by the government, including the
fiscal stimulus package for 2017 and the consumption
tax hike in October 2019.
Korea: The medium-term forecast incorporates the
government’s announced medium-term consolidation
path.
Mexico: Fiscal projections for 2017 are broadly in
line with the approved budget; projections for 2018

238

onward assume compliance with rules established in
the Fiscal Responsibility Law.
Netherlands: Fiscal projections for 2017–22 are
based on the authorities’ Bureau for Economic
Policy Analysis budget projections, after differences
in macroeconomic assumptions are adjusted for.
Historical data were revised following the June 2014
Central Bureau of Statistics release of revised macro
data because of the adoption of the European System
of National and Regional Accounts (ESA 2010) and
the revisions of data sources.
New Zealand: Fiscal projections are based on the
authorities’ fiscal year 2017/18 budget and on IMF
staff estimates.
Portugal: Projections for 2017 are based on the
authorities’ approved budget, adjusted to reflect the IMF
staff’s macroeconomic forecast. Projections thereafter are
based on the assumption of unchanged policies.
Puerto Rico: Fiscal projections are based on the Puerto
Rico Fiscal and Economic Growth Plan (FEGP), which
was prepared on March 13, 2017, and certified by
the Oversight Board. In line with assumptions of this
plan, IMF projections assume that Puerto Rico will
lose federal funding for the Affordable Care Act (ACA)
starting in 2018. Likewise, projections assume federal tax
incentives, which were neutralizing the effects of Puerto
Rico’s Act 154 on foreign companies, will no longer
be available, starting in 2018, leading to additional
revenue losses. Given sizable policy uncertainty, some
FEGP and IMF assumptions may differ, in particular,
those relating to the effects of the corporate tax reform,
tax compliance and tax adjustments (fees and rates);
reduction of subsidies, freezing of payroll operational
costs, improvement of mobility, and reduction of
expenses; and increasing health care efficiency. On
the expenditure side, measures include extension of
Act 66, which freezes much government spending,
through 2020; reduction of operating costs; decreases in
government subsidies; and spending cuts in education.
Although IMF policy assumptions are similar to those
in the FEGP scenario with full measures, the IMF’s
projections of fiscal revenues, expenditures, and balance
are different from FEGP’s. This stems from two main
differences in methodologies: first and foremost, while
IMF projections are on an accrual basis, FEGP’s are on
a cash basis. Second, the IMF and FEGP make very
different macroeconomic assumptions.
Russia: Projections for 2017–19 are IMF staff estimates,
based on the authorities’ budget. Projections for 2020–22

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Box A1 (continued)
are based on an oil price rule to be in effect in 2022, with
adjustments by the IMF staff.
Saudi Arabia: IMF staff projections of oil revenues
are based on WEO baseline oil prices and the
assumption that Saudi Arabia continues to meet its
commitments under the OPEC+ agreement. For nonoil revenues, IMF staff estimates of the revenue impact
of announced policies in the Fiscal Balance Program
are included in the baseline. On the expenditure side,
starting in 2017, following recent reforms, the wage
bill estimates no longer include the 13th-month wage
payment that used to be awarded every three years
in accordance with the lunar calendar. Expenditure
projections take the 2017 budget as a starting point
and reflect staff estimates of the effects of the latest
changes in policies and economic developments.
Singapore: For fiscal years 2016/17 and 2017/18,
projections are based on budget numbers. For the
remainder of the projection period, the IMF staff
assumes unchanged policies.
South Africa: Fiscal projections are based on the
authorities’ 2017 Budget Review.
Spain: For 2017, fiscal data are IMF staff projections,
reflecting the cash outturn through May and the 2017
budget passed by Parliament. For 2018 and beyond,
fiscal projections are based on the measures specified in
the Stability Programme Update 2017–20 and on the
IMF staff’s macroeconomic projections.
Sweden: Fiscal projections take into account the
authorities’ projections based on the 2017 Spring
Budget. The impact of cyclical developments on the
fiscal accounts is calculated using the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development’s
2005 elasticity to take into account output and
employment gaps.
Switzerland: The projections assume that fiscal policy
is adjusted as necessary to keep fiscal balances in line
with the requirements of Switzerland’s fiscal rules.
Turkey: The fiscal projections for 2017 are based on
the authorities’ Medium Term Programme 2017–19,
with adjustments for additionally announced fiscal
measures and the IMF staff’s higher inflation forecast.
For the medium term, the fiscal projections assume a
more gradual fiscal consolidation than envisaged in the
Medium Term Programme.
United Kingdom: Fiscal projections are based on
the country’s Budget 2017, published in March
2017, with expenditure projections based on the
budgeted nominal values and with revenue projections

adjusted for differences between IMF staff forecasts
of macroeconomic variables (such as GDP growth
and inflation) and the forecasts of these variables
assumed in the authorities’ fiscal projections. IMF
staff data exclude public sector banks and the effect of
transferring assets from the Royal Mail Pension Plan
to the public sector in April 2012. Real government
consumption and investment are part of the real GDP
path, which, according to the IMF staff, may or may
not be the same as projected by the U.K. Office for
Budget Responsibility.
United States: Fiscal projections are based on the
January 2017 Congressional Budget Office baseline
adjusted for the IMF staff’s policy and macroeconomic
assumptions. The baseline incorporates the key
provisions of the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2015,
including a partial rollback of the sequester spending
cuts in fiscal year 2016. In fiscal years 2017 through
2022, the IMF staff assumes that the sequester cuts will
continue to be partially replaced, in proportions similar
to those already implemented in fiscal years 2014 and
2015, with back-loaded measures generating savings
in mandatory programs and additional revenues.
Projections also incorporate the Protecting Americans
from Tax Hikes Act of 2015, which extended
some existing tax cuts for the short term and some
permanently. Finally, fiscal projections are adjusted to
reflect the IMF staff’s forecasts for key macroeconomic
and financial variables and different accounting
treatment of financial sector support and of definedbenefit pension plans and are converted to a general
government basis. Data are compiled using SNA 2008,
and when translated into government finance statistics,
this is in accordance with GFSM 2014. Because of data
limitations, most series begin in 2001.

Monetary Policy Assumptions
Monetary policy assumptions are based on the established policy framework in each country. In most
cases, this implies a nonaccommodative stance over
the business cycle: official interest rates will increase
when economic indicators suggest that inflation will
rise above its acceptable rate or range; they will decrease
when indicators suggest that inflation will not exceed
the acceptable rate or range, that output growth is
below its potential rate, and that the margin of slack in
the economy is significant. On this basis, the London
interbank offered rate (LIBOR) on six-month US dollar

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

239

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Box A1 (continued)
deposits is assumed to average 1.4 percent in 2017 and
1.9 percent in 2018 (see Table 1.1). The rate on threemonth euro deposits is assumed to average –0.3 percent
in 2017 and 2018. The interest rate on six-month
Japanese yen deposits is assumed to average 0.1 percent
in 2017 and 0.2 percent in 2018.
Australia: Monetary policy assumptions are in line
with market expectations.
Brazil: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent
with gradual convergence of inflation toward the
middle of the target range over the relevant horizon.
Canada: Monetary policy assumptions are in line
with market expectations.
China: Monetary policy is expected to tighten with
a gradual rise in the interest rate.
Denmark: The monetary policy is to maintain the
peg to the euro.
Euro area: Monetary policy assumptions for euro area
member countries are in line with market expectations.
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: The IMF
staff assumes that the currency board system remains
intact.
India: The policy (interest) rate assumption is consistent with an inflation rate within the Reserve Bank
of India’s targeted band.
Indonesia: Monetary policy assumptions are in line
with the maintenance of inflation within the central
bank’s targeted band.

240

Japan: Monetary policy assumptions are in line with
market expectations.
Korea: Monetary policy assumptions are in line with
market expectations.
Mexico: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent
with attaining the inflation target.
Russia: Monetary projections assume that policy
rates will be falling over the next year or two as inflation continues to be close to target in the context of a
tight monetary stance.
Saudi Arabia: Monetary policy projections are based
on the continuation of the exchange rate peg to the
US dollar.
Singapore: Broad money is projected to grow in line
with the projected growth in nominal GDP.
Sweden: Monetary projections are in line with Riksbank projections.
Switzerland: The projections assume no change in
the policy rate in 2016–17.
Turkey: The outlook for monetary and financial
conditions assumes no changes to the current policy
stance.
United Kingdom: The short-term interest rate path is
based on market interest rate expectations.
United States: Following the Federal Reserve’s 25
basis point rate hike in mid-March, the IMF staff
expects the federal funds target rate to increase by 25
more basis points in 2017 and rise gradually thereafter.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

List of Tables
Output
A1.
A2.
A3.
A4.

Summary of World Output
Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP

Inflation
A5.
A6.
A7.

Summary of Inflation
Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices
Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices

Financial Policies
A8.

Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt

Foreign Trade
A9.

Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices

Current Account Transactions
A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
A11. Advanced Economies: Balance on Current Account
A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account

Balance of Payments and External Financing
A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances

Flow of Funds
A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing

Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

241

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table A1. Summary of World Output1
(Annual percent change)

World
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Other Advanced Economies2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States3
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan
Middle East and North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Memorandum
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2012–16
Memorandum
Median Growth Rate
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Low-Income Developing Countries
Output per Capita4
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Low-Income Developing Countries
World Growth Rate Based on Market Exchange
Rates
Value of World Output (billions of US dollars)
At Market Exchange Rates
At Purchasing Power Parities

Average
1999–2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

4.2
2.5
2.6
2.1
1.0
3.5
6.2

–0.1
–3.4
–2.8
–4.5
–5.4
–2.0
2.8

5.4
3.1
2.5
2.1
4.2
4.6
7.4

4.3
1.7
1.6
1.6
–0.1
2.9
6.4

3.5
1.2
2.2
–0.9
1.5
1.9
5.4

3.5
1.3
1.7
–0.2
2.0
2.3
5.1

3.6
2.1
2.6
1.3
0.3
2.9
4.7

3.4
2.2
2.9
2.0
1.1
2.0
4.3

3.2
1.7
1.5
1.8
1.0
2.0
4.3

3.6
2.2
2.2
2.1
1.5
2.4
4.6

3.7
2.0
2.3
1.9
0.7
2.2
4.9

3.8
1.7
1.7
1.5
0.6
2.2
5.0

7.2
8.0
4.3
3.3

–6.4
7.5
–3.0
–1.8

4.7
9.6
4.6
6.1

5.3
7.9
6.5
4.7

3.6
7.0
2.4
3.0

2.5
6.9
4.9
2.9

1.1
6.8
3.9
1.2

–2.2
6.8
4.7
0.1

0.4
6.4
3.1
–0.9

2.1
6.5
4.5
1.2

2.1
6.5
3.5
1.9

2.4
6.3
3.2
2.7

5.2
5.2
5.6

1.1
1.0
3.9

4.7
4.9
7.0

4.5
4.6
5.1

5.2
5.3
4.4

2.7
2.5
5.3

2.8
2.6
5.1

2.7
2.6
3.4

5.0
5.1
1.4

2.6
2.2
2.6

3.5
3.2
3.4

3.8
3.5
3.9

2.5
6.1

–4.3
5.8

2.1
7.5

1.8
5.2

–0.4
5.2

0.3
6.1

1.8
6.0

2.3
4.7

2.0
3.6

2.3
4.6

2.1
5.2

1.7
5.3

6.2
6.2
3.7

–1.9
4.1
–0.8

5.1
8.1
6.7

5.2
6.7
4.9

5.0
5.5
2.6

2.7
5.8
4.1

2.2
5.3
1.8

0.3
5.2
3.0

1.9
4.9
1.2

1.3
5.4
2.7

2.1
5.4
3.0

2.4
5.5
3.7

5.0

2.2

6.9

5.3

4.4

4.8

4.4

4.1

3.7

4.5

4.7

5.4

5.1

0.1

4.2

2.6

2.3

3.2

1.4

0.6

2.7

3.2

4.0

5.1

3.1
4.7
5.0

–3.8
1.6
3.9

2.3
4.6
6.1

2.0
4.7
5.6

1.0
4.3
5.1

1.6
4.3
5.3

2.5
3.8
4.8

1.8
3.5
4.3

2.0
3.0
4.0

3.0
3.5
4.5

2.5
3.5
5.0

1.8
3.8
5.4

1.8
4.5
3.4

–4.0
1.1
3.5

2.5
5.9
5.2

1.1
4.9
3.7

0.7
3.7
2.4

0.8
3.7
3.8

1.6
3.2
3.7

1.7
2.8
2.2

1.1
2.8
1.2

1.7
3.2
2.2

1.6
3.5
3.0

1.3
3.6
3.1

3.1

–2.1

4.1

3.1

2.5

2.6

2.8

2.7

2.5

3.0

3.1

2.9

43,843
62,820

60,280
83,777

65,906 73,119 74,489 76,551 78,594 74,311
89,271 94,857 99,664 104,684 110,258 115,108

1Real

Projections
2018

2022

75,368
79,281
84,375 103,201
120,197 126,634 133,805 167,782

GDP.
the United States, euro area countries, and Japan.
3Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure.
4The output per capita is at purchasing power parity.
2Excludes

242

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A2. Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand1
(Annual percent change)
Average
1999–2008 2009 2010
Real GDP
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Netherlands
Belgium
Austria
Greece
Portugal
Ireland
Finland
Slovak Republic
Lithuania
Slovenia
Luxembourg
Latvia
Estonia
Cyprus
Malta
Japan
United Kingdom
Korea
Canada
Australia
Taiwan Province of China
Switzerland
Sweden
Singapore
Hong Kong SAR
Norway
Czech Republic
Israel
Denmark
New Zealand
Puerto Rico
Macao SAR
Iceland
San Marino
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Real Total Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies3
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

Projections
2015 2016 2017 2018 2022

2011

2012 2013

2014

2.1
2.2
2.6
2.9
1.3
2.0
1.9
1.5
0.9
1.1
0.1
0.8
1.4
3.2
1.4
2.3
1.6
1.5
0.6
1.0
0.4 –0.2
0.9
1.6
8.3 25.5
–0.6
0.0
2.6
3.8
3.5
1.8
3.0
2.3
5.6
4.0
2.1
2.7
2.9
1.7
–1.5
1.7
8.2
7.1
0.3
1.1
3.1
2.2
3.3
2.8
2.6
0.9
2.8
2.4
4.0
0.7
2.5
1.2
2.6
4.1
3.6
1.9
2.8
2.4
1.9
1.6
2.7
5.3
3.5
2.6
1.7
1.6
2.8
3.2
–1.2 –1.1
–1.2 –21.5
1.9
4.1
–0.9
0.5

2.5
2.6
2.1
1.6
2.0
1.2
3.6
2.5
2.3
2.4
3.5
1.6
5.4
3.3
5.1
6.1
4.3
4.3
6.6
5.7
4.1
2.2
1.0
2.5
5.7
2.9
3.4
4.6
2.3
3.0
5.9
4.7
2.2
4.0
3.7
1.8
3.4
1.7
...
4.6
...

–3.4
–2.8
–4.5
–5.6
–2.9
–5.5
–3.6
–3.8
–2.3
–3.8
–4.3
–3.0
–4.7
–8.3
–5.4
–14.8
–7.8
–4.4
–14.3
–14.7
–1.8
–2.4
–5.4
–4.3
0.7
–2.9
1.7
–1.6
–2.2
–5.2
–0.6
–2.5
–1.6
–4.8
1.5
–4.9
0.4
–2.0
1.3
–6.9
–12.8

3.1
2.5
2.1
3.9
2.0
1.7
0.0
1.4
2.7
1.9
–5.5
1.9
1.8
3.0
5.0
1.6
1.2
4.9
–3.8
2.3
1.3
3.5
4.2
1.9
6.5
3.1
2.3
10.6
2.9
6.0
15.2
6.8
0.6
2.3
5.5
1.9
2.0
–0.4
25.3
–3.6
–4.6

1.7
1.6
1.6
3.7
2.1
0.6
–1.0
1.7
1.8
2.8
–9.1
–1.8
2.9
2.6
2.8
6.0
0.6
2.5
6.4
7.6
0.3
1.4
–0.1
1.5
3.7
3.1
2.7
3.8
1.8
2.7
6.2
4.8
1.0
1.8
5.2
1.3
1.9
–0.4
21.7
2.0
–9.5

1.2
2.2
–0.9
0.7
0.2
–2.8
–2.9
–1.1
0.1
0.7
–7.3
–4.0
0.0
–1.4
1.7
3.8
–2.7
–0.4
4.0
4.3
–3.2
2.6
1.5
1.3
2.3
1.7
3.6
2.1
1.0
–0.3
3.9
1.7
2.7
–0.8
2.2
0.2
2.5
0.0
9.2
1.2
–7.5

1.3
1.7
–0.2
0.6
0.6
–1.7
–1.7
–0.2
–0.1
0.1
–3.2
–1.1
1.6
–0.8
1.5
3.5
–1.1
4.0
2.6
1.9
–6.0
4.6
2.0
1.9
2.9
2.5
2.1
2.2
1.9
1.2
5.0
3.1
1.0
–0.5
4.2
0.9
2.1
–0.3
11.2
4.4
–3.0

2.1

–3.8

2.8

1.6

1.4

1.4

1.9

2.4
2.7
2.0
0.9
2.4
1.4
4.2
0.6
2.8
3.5
3.7

–3.7
–3.8
–4.0
–3.2
–2.5
–4.1
–6.0
–4.0
–4.9
–3.0
–2.6

2.9
2.9
1.5
2.9
2.1
2.0
–0.5
2.4
2.5
5.1
6.1

1.4
1.6
0.7
3.0
2.0
–0.6
–3.1
0.7
–0.6
3.4
3.1

0.8
2.1
–2.4
–0.8
–0.3
–5.6
–5.1
2.3
2.2
2.0
2.0

1.0
1.3
–0.6
1.0
0.7
–2.6
–3.2
2.4
2.1
2.1
1.5

2.1

–3.7

2.8

1.4

1.1

1.3

Fourth Quarter2
Projections
2016:Q4 2017:Q4 2018:Q4

1.7
1.5
1.8
1.9
1.2
0.9
3.2
2.2
1.2
1.5
0.0
1.4
5.1
1.9
3.3
2.3
3.1
4.2
2.0
2.1
2.8
5.5
1.0
1.8
2.8
1.5
2.5
1.5
1.4
3.2
2.0
2.0
1.1
2.6
4.0
1.7
3.6
–2.6
–2.1
7.2
1.0

2.2
2.2
2.1
2.0
1.6
1.5
3.1
3.1
1.6
2.3
1.8
2.5
4.1
2.8
3.3
3.5
4.0
3.9
3.8
4.0
3.4
5.1
1.5
1.7
3.0
3.0
2.2
2.0
1.0
3.1
2.5
3.5
1.4
3.5
3.1
1.9
3.5
–2.8
13.4
5.5
1.2

2.0
2.3
1.9
1.8
1.8
1.1
2.5
2.6
1.6
1.9
2.6
2.0
3.4
2.3
3.7
3.5
2.5
3.6
3.9
3.7
2.6
4.4
0.7
1.5
3.0
2.1
2.9
1.9
1.3
2.4
2.6
2.7
1.6
2.6
3.4
1.8
3.0
–2.5
7.0
3.3
1.3

1.7
1.7
1.5
1.2
1.8
0.8
1.7
1.8
1.5
1.4
1.0
1.2
2.8
1.5
3.4
3.0
1.8
3.0
3.0
3.0
2.2
3.2
0.6
1.7
2.9
1.8
2.7
2.2
1.7
1.7
2.6
3.3
1.9
2.3
3.0
1.8
2.4
–0.5
4.3
2.7
1.3

2.0
1.8
1.9
1.9
1.2
1.2
3.0
2.7
1.1
2.0
–1.0
2.0
8.9
2.4
2.9
3.5
4.6
3.9
2.3
3.2
2.9
5.9
1.7
1.9
2.4
2.0
2.4
2.7
0.9
2.1
2.9
3.2
2.0
1.8
4.7
2.9
2.8
...
...
10.7
...

2.2
2.3
2.2
2.2
2.1
1.5
3.1
3.4
1.9
1.8
3.6
2.0
0.4
2.5
3.6
2.4
2.2
3.9
4.3
3.0
3.1
3.9
1.4
1.3
3.4
3.0
2.3
1.6
2.1
2.7
2.0
2.6
1.2
3.6
2.7
0.7
4.6
...
...
5.5
...

1.9
2.3
1.7
1.8
1.4
1.0
2.1
1.9
1.5
2.0
1.7
2.3
2.4
2.6
3.7
5.5
3.7
2.9
4.0
4.0
2.6
4.4
0.5
1.5
2.8
2.0
3.2
2.4
0.3
2.6
2.8
3.0
1.8
3.0
3.1
1.8
1.9
...
...
1.8
...

2.1

1.4

2.0

1.9

1.5

1.7

2.1

1.8

2.0
2.7
1.3
1.3
1.4
0.2
1.9
0.4
3.4
1.5
2.6

2.4
3.5
1.9
1.5
1.6
1.3
3.4
0.7
1.9
0.0
2.5

1.7
1.7
2.3
2.4
1.9
1.0
2.9
0.4
1.5
0.8
1.9

2.3
2.3
2.1
2.1
1.9
1.6
2.6
1.1
1.6
4.4
3.1

2.1
2.5
1.9
2.0
1.7
1.1
2.2
0.7
1.2
1.9
2.6

1.7
1.6
1.5
1.5
1.8
0.7
1.5
0.6
1.7
1.7
2.6

2.0
2.1
2.4
2.3
1.5
1.3
2.3
0.5
1.6
1.7
2.0

2.2
2.2
2.4
2.0
1.7
1.4
2.9
1.5
2.0
5.0
2.7

2.1
2.5
0.9
1.7
1.9
1.1
1.8
0.5
1.1
1.6
3.3

1.9

2.3

1.5

2.1

1.9

1.5

1.8

2.1

1.9

1In

this and other tables, when countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
2From the fourth quarter of the preceding year.
3Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

243

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
(Annual percent change)
Averages
1999–2008 2009–18
Private Consumer Expenditure
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Public Consumption
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Gross Fixed Capital Formation
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

244

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Projections
2017
2018

2.6
3.1
1.8
0.9
2.3
1.0
3.4
1.0
3.0
3.6
3.7

1.5
1.9
0.6
1.2
1.0
–0.1
0.0
0.7
1.0
2.3
2.4

–1.2
–1.6
–1.1
0.3
0.2
–1.5
–3.6
–0.7
–3.2
0.0
0.0

1.9
1.9
0.8
0.3
1.8
1.2
0.3
2.4
0.6
3.6
3.7

1.3
2.3
–0.1
1.3
0.5
0.0
–2.4
–0.4
–0.5
2.3
3.0

0.9
1.5
–1.1
1.3
–0.2
–4.0
–3.5
2.0
1.7
1.9
2.1

1.2
1.5
–0.6
0.8
0.5
–2.4
–3.1
2.4
1.6
2.6
2.3

1.8
2.9
0.8
1.0
0.8
0.2
1.6
–0.9
2.2
2.7
2.3

2.4
3.6
1.7
1.6
1.4
1.6
2.9
–0.3
2.4
1.9
2.7

2.2
2.7
2.1
1.9
2.2
1.3
3.2
0.4
2.8
2.3
2.3

2.3
2.7
1.8
2.1
1.2
1.3
2.6
1.5
1.7
3.4
2.4

1.9
2.1
1.7
1.8
1.6
1.1
2.4
0.8
1.1
1.9
2.7

2.3

1.4

–1.2

1.7

1.3

1.1

1.3

1.8

2.4

2.2

2.2

1.7

2.2
2.1
2.0
1.0
1.6
1.4
5.1
1.8
3.1
2.6
2.8

1.0
0.3
0.9
2.0
1.3
–0.3
0.2
1.3
1.0
1.5
2.5

2.9
3.7
2.4
3.0
2.4
0.4
4.1
2.0
1.1
2.7
3.4

1.0
0.1
0.7
1.3
1.3
0.6
1.5
1.9
0.2
2.3
2.8

–0.5
–2.7
–0.1
0.9
1.0
–1.8
–0.3
1.9
0.2
1.3
1.5

0.1
–0.9
–0.3
1.1
1.6
–1.4
–4.7
1.7
1.7
0.7
2.0

–0.3
–2.4
0.3
1.4
1.5
–0.3
–2.1
1.5
0.3
–0.7
2.3

0.6
–0.5
0.7
1.5
1.3
–0.7
–0.3
0.5
2.3
0.8
2.5

1.5
1.3
1.3
2.9
1.1
–0.7
2.0
1.7
1.3
1.5
2.4

1.6
1.0
1.7
3.7
1.3
0.6
0.8
1.3
0.8
2.0
3.4

1.1
0.2
1.2
1.8
1.2
0.9
0.9
0.6
1.4
2.7
2.8

1.9
3.0
0.9
2.1
0.5
–0.4
0.4
–0.2
0.8
2.2
2.4

1.9

0.8

2.9

0.7

–0.9

0.1

–0.7

0.3

1.4

1.3

0.7

1.9

2.3
2.3
2.7
1.0
3.4
2.3
5.3
–1.0
1.8
4.9
3.7

1.1
1.5
0.0
1.5
0.4
–2.2
–2.3
0.6
1.0
0.7
2.3

–11.0
–13.1
–11.2
–9.9
–9.1
–9.9
–16.9
–9.7
–15.2
–11.8
–5.1

1.7
1.1
–0.3
5.0
2.1
–0.5
–4.9
–1.6
5.0
11.4
5.9

2.9
3.7
1.5
7.4
2.1
–1.9
–6.9
1.7
1.9
4.6
4.0

2.4
6.3
–3.4
–0.1
0.2
–9.3
–8.6
3.5
2.3
4.9
2.9

1.5
3.1
–2.5
–1.2
–0.8
–6.6
–3.4
4.9
3.2
1.3
2.5

3.3
4.8
1.7
3.8
0.1
–2.3
3.8
2.9
6.7
0.9
2.1

2.6
3.5
3.1
1.1
1.0
1.6
6.0
0.1
3.4
–4.6
1.9

1.7
0.6
4.4
2.9
2.9
2.9
3.1
0.9
0.5
–3.1
2.2

3.4
3.4
3.9
3.7
2.9
2.1
4.3
2.8
2.2
3.4
3.7

3.0
3.3
3.4
3.2
3.1
2.7
3.5
1.7
1.7
2.2
3.0

1.8

1.0

–11.8

1.8

3.2

3.4

1.9

3.6

2.1

1.0

3.2

2.8

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Averages
1999–2008 2009–18
Final Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Stock Building2
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Foreign Balance2
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Projections
2017
2018

2.5
2.8
2.0
0.9
2.4
1.3
4.2
0.6
2.8
3.7
3.5

1.3
1.6
0.5
1.4
0.9
–0.6
–0.5
0.8
1.0
1.8
2.4

–2.6
–3.1
–2.7
–1.4
–1.5
–2.9
–5.9
–2.4
–4.4
–2.2
–0.7

1.7
1.5
0.5
1.4
1.8
0.7
–0.7
1.4
1.1
5.0
4.1

1.3
1.7
0.3
2.5
0.9
–0.8
–3.0
0.5
0.0
2.6
2.9

1.1
1.9
–1.5
1.0
0.3
–4.5
–4.8
2.3
1.8
2.4
2.3

1.0
1.2
–0.8
0.5
0.4
–2.8
–3.0
2.8
1.6
1.6
2.3

1.9
2.7
1.0
1.7
0.7
–0.4
1.6
0.2
2.9
1.9
2.3

2.3
3.3
1.9
1.8
1.2
1.1
3.3
0.2
2.3
0.3
2.5

2.1
2.1
2.5
2.5
2.2
1.5
2.7
0.7
2.0
1.0
2.4

2.4
2.5
2.1
2.4
1.6
1.4
2.6
1.8
1.8
3.3
2.9

2.1
2.4
1.9
2.2
1.7
1.1
2.3
0.8
1.1
2.0
2.6

2.2

1.3

–2.7

1.6

1.3

1.4

1.1

1.9

2.2

1.8

2.2

1.9

0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.2

0.0
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
0.1
0.0
0.0
–0.1
0.1
0.1
–0.1

–1.1
–0.8
–1.3
–1.7
–1.1
–1.2
–0.2
–1.6
–0.5
–0.7
–1.9

1.3
1.5
0.9
1.4
0.3
1.3
0.2
1.0
1.5
0.1
1.9

0.1
–0.1
0.5
0.5
1.1
0.2
–0.1
0.2
–0.6
0.7
0.2

–0.2
0.1
–0.9
–1.6
–0.6
–1.1
–0.2
0.0
0.2
–0.3
–0.3

0.0
0.2
0.2
0.5
0.2
0.2
–0.3
–0.4
0.3
0.5
–0.8

0.1
–0.1
0.3
–0.4
0.7
0.6
0.3
0.1
0.7
–0.3
0.2

0.1
0.2
0.0
–0.3
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.6
–0.2
–0.3
0.1

–0.3
–0.4
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.5
0.1
–0.3
–0.5
–0.3
–0.5

–0.1
–0.2
0.0
–0.2
0.4
0.2
0.0
–0.5
–0.1
1.1
0.1

0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.8
0.0

0.0

0.0

–1.0

1.2

0.1

–0.2

0.2

0.1

0.2

–0.3

–0.1

0.0

0.0
–0.2
0.1
0.7
–0.3
–0.1
–0.7
0.2
–0.2
–0.7
0.4

0.1
0.0
0.3
0.1
–0.2
0.2
1.0
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
0.3

0.4
1.2
–0.6
–2.6
–0.4
–1.3
2.8
–1.2
0.3
0.0
1.5

0.1
–0.5
0.7
1.1
–0.1
–0.3
0.5
1.6
–0.8
–2.1
0.1

0.3
0.0
0.9
0.9
0.0
1.2
2.1
–0.9
1.4
–0.3
0.5

0.4
0.1
1.5
1.4
0.5
2.8
2.2
–0.8
–0.7
–0.4
0.5

0.3
0.3
0.4
–0.3
–0.1
0.8
1.5
–0.4
–0.8
0.3
0.9

0.1
–0.2
0.1
0.7
–0.5
–0.1
–0.5
0.0
–0.4
1.1
0.5

–0.2
–0.7
0.1
0.1
–0.5
–0.5
–0.1
0.3
0.0
1.0
–0.4

–0.1
–0.2
–0.4
–0.4
–0.8
–0.1
0.5
0.6
–0.4
0.6
0.1

–0.1
–0.2
0.2
0.0
–0.3
–0.1
0.5
0.3
–0.1
–0.5
–0.4

0.0
–0.2
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.3
–0.1
0.3
0.3
0.1

–0.1

0.0

0.0

–0.1

0.1

0.2

0.0

0.0

–0.3

–0.1

–0.1

–0.1

1Excludes

the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Changes expressed as percent of GDP in the preceding period.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

245

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
(Annual percent change)

Commonwealth of Independent States1,2
Russia
Excluding Russia
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Georgia
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyz Republic
Moldova
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Ukraine3
Uzbekistan
Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
Fiji
India4
Indonesia
Kiribati
Lao P.D.R.
Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nauru
Nepal
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Timor-Leste5
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vietnam
Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Hungary
Kosovo
FYR Macedonia
Montenegro
Poland
Romania
Serbia
Turkey

246

Average
1999–2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

7.2
6.9
8.0
10.5
14.6
7.5
6.6
8.7
4.7
4.9
8.1
15.2
6.2
6.1
8.0
5.8
8.3
1.9
9.5
10.1
1.9
6.9
4.9
1.1
6.7
5.5
7.8
1.9
0.5
6.2
11.7
...
4.1
...
2.3
4.6
3.8
1.6
5.1
4.8
...
1.1
...
3.0
6.8
4.3
6.8
5.4
5.3
3.7
3.4
...
3.6
...
4.1
5.4
4.1
4.0

–6.4
–7.8
–2.4
–14.1
9.3
0.2
–3.7
1.2
2.9
–6.0
3.9
6.1
–15.1
8.1
7.5
5.3
5.7
–1.8
0.1
9.2
–1.4
8.5
4.7
1.1
7.4
–1.5
–6.6
6.5
1.2
–2.1
5.1
8.7
4.5
–9.1
6.8
1.1
–6.1
–4.7
3.5
–0.7
13.0
2.9
–4.4
3.3
5.4
–3.0
3.4
–0.8
–3.6
–7.4
–6.6
3.6
–0.4
–5.7
2.6
–7.1
–3.1
–4.7

4.7
4.5
5.0
2.2
5.0
7.7
6.2
7.3
–0.5
7.1
6.5
9.2
0.3
8.5
9.6
6.0
9.3
2.7
6.0
10.6
3.0
10.3
6.4
–1.6
8.0
7.5
7.1
1.2
3.3
7.3
5.3
13.6
4.8
3.0
10.1
7.6
–2.0
6.8
8.0
7.5
10.2
3.2
–3.1
1.6
6.4
4.6
3.7
0.8
1.3
–1.7
0.7
3.3
3.4
2.5
3.7
–0.8
0.6
8.5

5.3
5.1
6.0
4.7
–1.6
5.5
7.2
7.5
6.0
6.8
7.4
14.7
5.5
8.3
7.9
6.5
9.7
3.7
7.2
9.5
2.7
6.6
6.2
0.6
8.0
5.3
8.4
3.5
1.0
17.3
5.6
11.7
3.4
5.1
1.1
3.7
5.6
13.2
8.4
0.8
7.9
1.8
7.9
1.2
6.2
6.5
2.5
0.9
1.9
–0.3
1.7
4.4
2.3
3.2
5.0
1.1
1.4
11.1

3.6
3.7
3.6
7.1
2.2
1.7
6.4
5.0
–0.1
–0.7
7.5
11.1
0.2
8.2
7.0
6.3
6.4
0.9
7.3
7.9
1.4
5.5
6.0
5.1
7.8
5.5
2.3
2.9
–1.7
12.3
7.3
10.1
4.8
3.9
4.6
6.7
0.4
4.6
9.1
7.2
5.0
–1.1
–3.8
1.8
5.2
2.4
1.4
–0.9
0.0
–2.2
–1.6
2.8
–0.5
–2.7
1.6
0.6
–1.0
4.8

2.5
1.8
4.2
3.3
5.8
1.0
3.4
6.0
10.9
9.4
7.4
10.2
0.0
8.0
6.9
6.0
3.6
–2.1
7.4
7.8
4.7
6.4
5.6
5.0
8.0
4.7
7.1
–0.8
–3.0
11.6
8.4
34.2
4.1
–2.1
3.8
7.1
–1.9
3.0
3.4
2.7
2.7
–0.6
4.6
2.0
5.4
4.9
1.0
2.4
0.9
–1.1
2.1
3.4
2.9
3.5
1.4
3.5
2.6
8.5

1.1
0.7
1.9
3.6
2.7
1.7
4.6
4.3
4.0
4.8
6.7
10.3
–6.6
8.1
6.8
6.3
4.0
–2.5
7.1
7.3
5.6
7.5
5.0
0.4
7.6
6.0
7.6
–0.4
–2.4
7.9
8.0
36.5
6.0
5.4
12.5
6.1
1.2
2.3
5.0
0.9
4.3
2.9
1.3
2.3
6.0
3.9
1.8
1.1
1.3
–0.5
4.0
1.2
3.6
1.8
3.3
3.1
–1.8
5.2

–2.2
–2.8
–0.6
3.3
0.6
–3.8
2.9
1.2
3.5
–0.4
6.0
6.5
–9.8
8.0
6.8
6.8
6.1
–0.4
7.2
6.9
3.8
8.0
4.9
7.5
7.3
5.0
3.3
1.9
3.7
2.4
7.0
2.8
3.3
11.4
9.2
6.1
1.6
2.5
4.8
2.9
4.0
3.5
9.1
1.6
6.7
4.7
2.2
3.0
3.6
2.2
3.1
4.1
3.8
3.4
3.9
3.9
0.8
6.1

0.4
–0.2
1.9
0.2
–3.1
–2.6
2.7
1.1
3.8
4.3
6.9
6.2
2.3
7.8
6.4
7.2
6.2
–2.5
7.0
6.7
0.4
7.1
5.0
4.2
7.0
4.2
3.9
2.0
3.0
1.0
6.1
10.4
0.4
1.9
2.4
6.9
7.1
3.3
4.4
3.2
5.0
3.1
3.0
4.0
6.2
3.1
3.4
2.0
3.4
3.0
2.0
3.4
2.4
2.5
2.6
4.8
2.8
3.2

2.1
1.8
2.9
3.5
–1.0
0.7
4.0
3.3
3.5
4.0
4.5
6.5
2.0
6.0
6.5
7.1
5.9
–1.3
6.9
6.8
3.8
6.7
5.2
2.8
6.9
5.4
4.6
1.9
2.0
2.0
7.2
4.0
7.5
1.0
3.1
6.6
2.1
3.0
4.7
3.7
4.0
3.1
3.2
4.5
6.3
4.5
3.7
2.5
3.6
2.9
3.2
3.5
2.5
3.0
3.8
5.5
3.0
5.1

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

Projections
2018
2022
2.1
1.6
3.3
2.9
1.3
0.7
4.2
2.8
3.8
3.7
4.0
6.3
3.2
6.0
6.5
7.0
11.2
0.6
6.8
6.5
3.5
7.4
5.3
2.3
6.9
4.8
4.7
1.8
1.4
2.5
7.6
–4.0
5.0
5.5
2.9
6.7
0.9
3.1
4.8
3.5
6.0
3.2
2.5
4.0
6.3
3.5
3.7
2.6
3.2
2.7
3.4
3.5
3.2
2.8
3.3
4.4
3.5
3.5

2.4
1.5
4.3
4.0
3.1
2.0
5.5
4.3
5.4
3.9
4.0
5.4
4.0
6.0
6.3
7.0
6.3
5.3
6.0
5.8
3.2
8.2
5.5
1.8
7.0
4.9
5.0
1.5
0.6
8.2
7.5
2.0
3.8
2.0
3.3
6.8
2.1
2.7
5.2
3.0
5.2
1.4
2.0
3.0
6.2
3.2
4.0
3.0
2.5
2.1
2.2
4.0
3.8
3.1
2.6
3.3
4.0
3.6

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)

Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan
Afghanistan
Algeria
Bahrain
Djibouti
Egypt
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya4
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Sudan6
Syria7
Tunisia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen

Average
1999–2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Projections
2018
2022

3.3
4.6
2.6
2.1
1.8
5.7
3.4
3.4
4.3
3.4
4.7
2.8
4.8
3.3
2.6
3.7
3.6
1.8
0.7
4.5
1.3
2.6
3.9
5.7
2.2
5.1
3.7
2.1
3.5
4.1
7.6
1.5
3.4

–1.8
–12.1
–5.9
–4.2
–4.0
0.8
3.4
–0.1
–1.6
1.7
–1.0
–1.2
0.9
0.6
–3.1
–6.6
0.5
3.3
3.1
–2.4
–3.4
–4.7
–3.3
1.6
–4.0
1.0
–1.0
–0.8
–2.0
3.0
–4.4
4.2
–3.2

6.1
–7.2
10.1
1.5
0.3
3.3
4.1
7.5
5.8
4.0
5.0
0.7
8.3
3.5
1.4
–0.5
2.9
4.4
–5.5
3.7
–1.4
5.1
4.4
5.8
13.1
8.5
–2.9
0.1
–2.3
5.2
3.3
7.8
–1.5

4.7
–2.1
6.0
0.6
0.8
2.1
5.2
4.0
6.1
6.6
4.3
–0.2
3.1
7.9
2.2
0.8
4.2
5.4
5.5
3.8
1.4
4.0
6.3
11.8
4.3
6.5
–0.8
3.4
0.2
5.8
–0.3
5.2
4.2

3.0
3.5
–1.0
3.1
0.3
3.7
5.1
1.9
5.3
4.0
4.8
–1.1
2.8
5.6
1.9
–1.2
3.0
4.8
2.9
4.1
–0.5
4.0
6.5
9.2
–1.2
6.0
–0.8
–0.7
1.3
2.7
1.3
3.5
5.6

2.9
–0.1
2.4
0.0
–0.1
0.7
6.8
3.0
4.0
4.9
2.3
–0.6
4.7
4.9
1.8
2.4
3.7
5.2
4.2
2.8
0.2
1.4
4.9
6.6
14.0
5.8
6.6
0.2
2.5
2.9
2.7
4.6
1.3

1.2
5.1
–2.5
–0.5
0.1
4.1
5.5
0.5
1.9
4.4
3.7
4.4
7.6
4.0
1.4
7.3
4.2
3.8
2.8
3.1
0.5
2.3
4.8
6.1
4.7
2.4
5.1
–0.9
0.3
0.4
–0.6
3.2
–3.9

0.1
4.1
2.6
–1.7
0.9
2.9
4.9
–3.8
2.3
3.1
4.7
–2.5
7.0
0.2
2.3
6.4
4.1
3.1
1.2
3.6
0.9
2.6
4.9
5.8
3.0
3.3
4.9
2.0
0.9
–2.7
–0.6
0.4
–6.2

–0.9
5.3
–2.2
–0.3
1.6
–0.8
4.3
–3.6
1.6
2.0
4.3
2.6
6.6
–1.5
2.4
3.7
3.1
3.3
1.4
3.6
1.3
2.3
4.7
4.9
4.1
4.0
3.1
1.0
0.8
–10.5
–5.4
1.5
–16.5

1.2
2.7
2.5
1.8
0.9
2.5
4.2
0.7
1.4
1.7
3.8
3.9
4.8
0.2
2.3
2.5
3.2
3.5
1.0
4.0
1.7
2.1
4.5
5.3
3.9
2.7
2.7
1.6
2.2
–1.2
–3.2
3.5
–12.0

1.9
3.0
2.5
2.5
0.5
2.3
4.0
1.5
2.5
2.8
3.8
2.8
5.8
0.6
2.1
2.3
3.4
3.6
3.0
3.6
2.3
1.9
4.3
5.6
4.0
3.8
3.5
2.8
2.8
1.2
1.9
3.1
–6.0

2.7
2.0
3.2
1.5
1.6
1.7
3.7
2.0
3.3
3.6
3.9
1.5
5.0
1.6
2.0
2.7
4.0
2.8
3.0
3.8
2.8
2.7
4.5
5.5
3.8
3.8
2.7
1.5
3.0
3.1
1.4
3.0
–1.3

5.2
...
4.0
6.0
3.3
5.1
4.4
13.0
6.3
5.9
3.8
4.5
5.2
4.4
2.9
5.1
11.3
3.2
...
6.2
3.4
4.9
5.9
4.1

1.1
20.6
1.6
2.5
1.6
4.7
0.3
3.4
5.5
–7.1
10.1
–3.0
–1.0
4.2
6.1
0.4
12.0
–2.1
...
4.7
5.9
3.1
–5.2
3.9

4.7
8.4
3.6
4.3
4.1
5.1
5.8
6.4
2.3
–2.4
8.0
3.2
4.8
3.8
4.8
2.6
18.1
4.8
...
2.5
3.4
2.6
1.6
7.7

4.5
6.5
2.8
2.0
7.3
1.8
3.5
7.5
2.6
10.9
0.9
–66.7
4.7
5.2
–1.1
3.6
13.4
10.3
...
–1.2
...
–1.9
6.4
–12.7

5.2
14.0
3.4
3.7
4.8
2.2
–7.7
13.9
2.7
7.9
2.8
124.7
5.8
3.0
9.3
3.8
4.7
5.4
1.2
–3.0
...
3.9
5.1
2.4

2.7
5.7
2.8
5.4
5.0
3.3
–0.3
7.6
2.8
0.4
2.6
–36.8
6.1
4.5
4.4
3.7
4.4
2.7
2.8
5.2
...
2.4
5.8
4.8

2.8
2.7
3.8
4.4
6.0
2.9
3.2
0.7
3.1
0.6
2.0
–53.0
5.6
2.7
2.5
4.1
4.0
3.7
3.6
1.6
...
2.3
3.3
–0.2

2.7
1.3
3.7
2.9
6.5
4.4
–1.6
4.8
2.4
2.1
0.8
–10.3
0.9
4.5
4.2
4.1
3.6
4.1
3.6
4.9
...
1.1
3.8
–28.1

5.0
2.4
3.3
3.0
6.5
4.3
12.5
11.0
2.0
2.5
1.0
–3.0
1.7
1.2
3.0
4.5
2.2
1.7
3.2
3.0
...
1.0
3.0
–9.8

2.6
2.5
1.5
2.5
7.0
4.1
3.5
–0.4
2.3
–2.1
1.5
55.1
3.8
4.8
0.0
5.3
2.5
0.1
2.4
3.7
...
2.3
1.3
–2.0

3.5
3.0
0.8
1.7
7.0
4.5
3.8
2.9
2.5
4.1
2.0
31.2
3.0
3.0
3.7
5.6
3.1
1.1
3.5
3.6
...
3.0
3.4
8.5

3.8
5.0
2.4
2.2
6.0
6.0
4.1
2.1
3.0
3.2
3.0
2.6
4.0
4.6
2.2
5.9
3.2
2.0
3.8
3.5
...
4.3
3.1
5.5

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

247

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
South Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe8

Average
1999–2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

5.6
11.2
4.5
5.2
5.7
3.1
7.4
3.6
1.2
7.8
2.0
2.4
3.5
0.5
28.1
–1.1
8.1
–0.1
3.7
5.3
3.5
2.9
3.3
3.5
...
4.0
3.8
5.4
4.3
7.8
4.1
4.4
7.5
8.0
4.3
4.4
2.2
7.5
4.0
...
3.6
6.1
1.6
7.5
6.4
–6.8

3.9
2.4
2.3
–7.7
3.0
3.8
–1.3
1.9
1.7
4.1
1.8
2.9
7.8
3.3
1.3
3.9
10.0
–2.3
6.4
4.8
–1.5
3.4
3.3
4.5
5.1
–4.7
8.3
4.7
3.0
6.4
0.3
–0.7
8.4
6.3
4.0
2.4
–1.1
3.2
–1.5
...
4.5
5.4
3.5
8.1
9.2
7.4

7.0
3.4
2.1
8.6
8.4
5.1
1.5
3.3
3.0
13.6
2.1
7.1
8.7
2.0
–8.9
2.2
10.6
6.3
6.5
7.9
4.2
4.6
8.4
6.9
6.1
0.3
6.9
5.4
4.1
6.7
6.0
8.4
11.3
7.3
4.5
4.3
5.9
5.3
3.0
...
3.5
6.4
4.1
7.7
10.3
15.4

5.1
3.9
3.0
6.0
6.6
4.0
4.0
4.1
3.3
0.1
2.2
6.9
3.4
–4.2
6.5
8.7
11.4
7.1
–4.3
14.0
5.6
8.1
6.1
4.5
7.4
1.5
4.9
3.2
3.9
7.1
5.1
2.2
4.9
7.8
4.8
1.9
5.4
6.3
3.3
...
2.0
7.9
4.8
6.8
5.6
16.3

4.4
5.2
4.8
4.5
6.5
4.4
1.1
4.6
4.1
8.8
3.0
7.1
3.8
10.1
8.3
7.0
8.7
5.3
5.6
9.3
5.9
–1.7
4.6
5.3
8.2
3.0
1.9
–0.8
3.2
7.2
5.1
11.8
4.3
8.8
4.5
4.5
3.7
15.2
2.2
–52.4
3.5
5.1
5.9
2.2
7.6
13.6

5.3
6.8
7.2
11.3
5.7
5.9
0.8
5.6
–36.7
5.8
3.5
8.5
3.3
9.3
–4.1
3.1
9.9
5.5
4.8
7.3
3.9
3.3
5.9
3.6
8.7
2.3
5.2
2.3
3.2
7.1
5.6
5.3
5.4
4.7
4.3
3.6
6.0
20.7
2.5
29.3
4.8
7.3
6.1
4.7
5.1
5.3

5.1
4.8
6.4
4.1
4.2
4.5
0.6
5.9
1.0
6.9
2.0
9.5
6.8
8.8
–0.7
5.0
10.3
4.4
0.9
4.0
3.7
1.0
5.4
3.4
0.7
3.3
5.7
7.0
3.6
7.4
6.4
7.5
6.3
7.6
4.1
4.1
4.5
4.6
1.7
2.9
3.6
7.0
5.4
4.6
4.7
2.8

3.4
3.0
2.1
–1.7
4.0
–4.0
1.0
5.8
4.8
1.8
1.0
6.9
2.6
8.9
–9.1
4.8
10.4
3.9
4.3
3.8
3.5
5.1
5.7
2.5
0.0
3.1
2.9
6.0
3.5
6.6
6.0
4.0
2.7
8.9
4.0
6.5
5.0
–20.5
1.3
–0.2
1.1
7.0
5.3
5.7
2.9
1.4

1.4
–0.7
4.0
4.3
5.9
–1.0
3.8
4.7
4.5
–6.4
2.2
2.4
–2.8
7.7
–9.7
3.7
8.0
2.1
2.2
3.5
6.6
5.1
5.8
2.4
–1.6
4.2
2.3
5.8
3.9
3.8
1.1
5.0
–1.6
5.9
4.1
6.7
4.5
6.1
0.3
–13.8
0.0
7.0
5.0
2.3
3.4
0.7

2.6
1.5
5.4
4.5
6.4
0.0
4.0
4.0
4.7
0.6
3.3
2.8
–3.6
7.6
–7.4
3.3
8.5
1.0
3.0
5.9
6.7
5.0
5.0
4.6
2.6
4.3
4.5
5.3
3.9
4.7
0.8
4.2
0.8
6.2
5.0
6.8
4.1
6.0
0.7
–6.3
0.3
6.5
5.0
4.4
4.0
2.8

Projections
2018
2022
3.4
1.6
6.0
4.8
6.5
0.1
4.1
4.6
5.0
2.4
4.0
3.0
2.8
7.3
–7.8
3.6
8.5
2.7
3.5
8.9
5.8
5.0
5.5
3.1
4.0
5.3
5.0
5.0
4.0
5.3
2.5
4.7
1.9
6.8
5.5
7.0
3.4
6.1
1.1
–3.4
–0.9
6.8
5.3
5.2
4.5
0.8

3.9
1.4
6.2
4.2
6.0
0.5
4.1
5.5
5.6
3.7
4.0
4.7
0.3
6.5
–1.4
4.0
7.5
5.1
4.8
5.4
5.2
5.0
6.5
5.6
6.8
5.0
5.5
4.7
4.1
14.0
3.6
6.2
1.7
7.5
5.5
6.4
4.0
7.4
2.2
3.9
2.2
6.6
5.6
7.3
4.5
–0.9

1Data for some countries refer to real net material product (NMP) or are estimates based on NMP. The figures should be interpreted only as indicative of broad orders of magnitude because
reliable, comparable data are not generally available. In particular, the growth of output of new private enterprises of the informal economy is not fully reflected in the recent figures.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic
structure.
3Data are based on the 2008 System of National Accounts. The revised national accounts data are available beginning in 2000 and exclude Crimea and Sevastopol from 2010 onward.
4See country-specific notes for India and Libya in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
5In this table only, the data for Timor-Leste are based on non-oil GDP.
6Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
7Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
8The Zimbabwe dollar ceased circulating in early 2009. Data are based on IMF staff estimates of price and exchange rate developments in US dollars. IMF staff estimates of US dollar values
may differ from authorities’ estimates. Real GDP is in constant 2009 prices.

248

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A5. Summary of Inflation
(Percent)

GDP Deflators
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Other Advanced Economies1
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area2
Japan
Other Advanced Economies1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States4
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan
Middle East and North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Memorandum
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products5
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by ­­
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2012–16
Memorandum
Median Inflation Rate
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3

Average
1999–2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Projections
2018
2022

1.8
2.3
2.0
–1.2
2.1

0.7
0.8
1.0
–0.6
0.9

0.9
1.2
0.7
–1.9
2.0

1.3
2.1
1.0
–1.7
2.0

1.2
1.8
1.3
–0.8
1.2

1.2
1.6
1.2
–0.3
1.4

1.4
1.8
0.9
1.7
1.3

1.3
1.1
1.4
2.1
1.0

1.0
1.3
0.8
0.3
1.1

1.4
1.7
0.9
–0.2
2.0

1.6
1.9
1.3
0.9
1.6

1.8
1.9
1.8
1.1
2.0

2.2
2.8
2.2
–0.2
2.1
7.6

0.2
–0.3
0.3
–1.3
1.4
5.0

1.5
1.6
1.6
–0.7
2.4
5.6

2.7
3.1
2.7
–0.3
3.3
7.1

2.0
2.1
2.5
–0.1
2.1
5.8

1.4
1.5
1.3
0.3
1.7
5.5

1.4
1.6
0.4
2.8
1.5
4.7

0.3
0.1
0.0
0.8
0.5
4.7

0.8
1.3
0.2
–0.1
1.0
4.3

1.7
2.1
1.5
0.4
1.8
4.2

1.7
2.1
1.4
0.5
1.9
4.4

2.1
2.3
2.0
1.6
2.0
3.9

18.8
4.0
15.4
6.7

11.1
2.8
4.8
4.6

7.2
5.1
5.7
4.2

9.8
6.5
5.5
5.2

6.2
4.6
6.1
4.6

6.5
4.6
4.5
4.6

8.1
3.4
4.1
4.9

15.5
2.7
3.2
5.5

8.3
2.8
3.3
5.6

5.8
2.6
6.0
4.2

5.2
3.2
5.7
3.6

4.6
3.4
4.9
3.4

6.4
6.4
10.5

7.3
6.1
9.8

6.6
6.2
8.1

9.2
8.7
9.4

9.8
9.7
9.3

9.2
9.4
6.6

6.8
6.6
6.3

5.7
5.9
7.0

5.1
5.4
11.3

6.8
7.1
11.0

7.7
8.1
9.5

4.9
4.8
7.8

2.7
9.9

1.0
8.2

2.0
9.2

3.1
11.7

2.6
9.9

1.5
8.1

0.5
7.2

0.0
7.2

0.2
8.9

1.7
9.7

1.7
8.8

2.0
7.2

12.3
6.3
...

7.7
4.3
...

6.7
5.3
...

8.6
6.7
...

8.0
5.3
...

8.1
4.9
...

6.5
4.2
...

8.8
3.8
...

7.3
3.7
...

5.9
3.9
...

6.2
4.1
...

5.1
3.7
...

8.2

7.2

6.7

7.7

7.0

6.3

5.7

5.5

5.1

5.5

5.5

4.7

8.8

12.6

9.8

10.2

7.9

6.8

10.5

15.6

9.6

17.1

15.3

6.5

2.3
5.4

0.8
3.7

1.9
4.1

3.2
5.4

2.6
4.5

1.4
3.9

0.7
3.2

0.1
2.7

0.6
2.8

1.6
3.4

1.5
3.5

2.0
3.1

1Excludes

the United States, euro area countries, and Japan.
on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
3Excludes Argentina and Venezuela. See country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure.
5Data are missing because of Argentina, which accounts for more than 30 percent of the weights of the group. See country-specific notes for Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical
Appendix.
2Based

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

249

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area3
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Netherlands
Belgium
Austria
Greece
Portugal
Ireland
Finland
Slovak Republic
Lithuania
Slovenia
Luxembourg
Latvia
Estonia
Cyprus
Malta
Japan
United Kingdom3
Korea
Canada
Australia
Taiwan Province of China
Switzerland
Sweden
Singapore
Hong Kong SAR
Norway
Czech Republic
Israel
Denmark
New Zealand
Puerto Rico
Macao SAR
Iceland
San Marino
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

Average
1999–2008
2.2
2.8
2.2
1.7
1.9
2.4
3.3
2.4
2.2
1.9
3.3
2.9
3.4
1.8
6.2
2.7
5.4
2.8
5.6
4.7
2.7
2.6
–0.2
1.8
2.9
2.3
3.1
1.1
1.1
1.7
1.4
–0.6
2.1
2.9
2.2
2.2
2.5
2.8
...
5.3
...

2009
0.2
–0.3
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.8
–0.3
1.0
0.0
0.4
1.3
–0.9
–1.7
1.6
0.9
4.2
0.8
0.0
3.3
0.2
0.2
1.8
–1.3
2.2
2.8
0.3
1.8
–0.9
–0.5
1.9
0.6
0.6
2.2
1.0
3.3
1.3
2.1
0.3
1.2
12.0
2.4

2010
1.5
1.6
1.6
1.1
1.7
1.6
1.8
0.9
2.3
1.7
4.7
1.4
–1.6
1.7
0.7
1.2
1.8
2.8
–1.2
2.7
2.6
2.0
–0.7
3.3
2.9
1.8
2.9
1.0
0.7
1.9
2.8
2.3
2.4
1.5
2.7
2.3
2.3
2.5
2.8
5.4
2.6

2011
2.7
3.1
2.7
2.5
2.3
2.9
3.2
2.5
3.4
3.5
3.1
3.6
1.2
3.3
4.1
4.1
1.8
3.7
4.2
5.1
3.5
2.5
–0.3
4.5
4.0
2.9
3.3
1.4
0.2
1.4
5.2
5.3
1.3
1.9
3.5
2.8
4.0
2.9
5.8
4.0
2.0

2012
2.0
2.1
2.5
2.1
2.2
3.3
2.4
2.8
2.6
2.6
1.0
2.8
1.9
3.2
3.7
3.2
2.6
2.9
2.3
4.2
3.1
3.2
–0.1
2.8
2.2
1.5
1.7
1.9
–0.7
0.9
4.6
4.1
0.7
3.3
1.7
2.4
1.1
1.3
6.1
5.2
2.8

2013
1.4
1.5
1.3
1.6
1.0
1.2
1.4
2.6
1.2
2.1
–0.9
0.4
0.5
2.2
1.5
1.2
1.8
1.7
0.0
3.2
0.4
1.0
0.3
2.6
1.3
0.9
2.5
0.8
–0.2
0.4
2.4
4.3
2.1
1.4
1.5
0.8
1.1
1.1
5.5
3.9
1.6

2014
1.4
1.6
0.4
0.8
0.6
0.2
–0.1
0.3
0.5
1.5
–1.4
–0.2
0.3
1.2
–0.1
0.2
0.2
0.7
0.7
0.5
–0.3
0.8
2.8
1.5
1.3
1.9
2.5
1.2
0.0
0.2
1.0
4.4
2.0
0.3
0.5
0.6
1.2
0.6
6.0
2.0
1.1

2015
0.3
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
–0.5
0.2
0.6
0.8
–1.1
0.5
0.0
–0.2
–0.3
–0.7
–0.5
0.1
0.2
0.1
–1.5
1.2
0.8
0.0
0.7
1.1
1.5
–0.3
–1.1
0.7
–0.5
3.0
2.2
0.3
–0.6
0.5
0.3
–0.8
4.6
1.6
0.1

2016
0.8
1.3
0.2
0.4
0.3
–0.1
–0.2
0.1
1.8
1.0
0.0
0.6
–0.2
0.4
–0.5
0.7
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.8
–1.2
0.9
–0.1
0.7
1.0
1.4
1.3
1.4
–0.4
1.1
–0.5
2.6
3.6
0.7
–0.5
0.3
0.6
–0.3
2.4
1.7
0.6

2.0

–0.1

1.4

2.6

1.9

1.3

1.5

0.3

0.8

Projections
2017 2018 2022
1.7
1.7
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.3
1.5
1.4
2.0
1.6
1.5
2.5
1.2
1.3
1.8
1.4
1.2
1.4
2.0
1.5
1.9
1.3
1.4
1.6
2.2
1.5
2.0
1.6
1.8
2.2
1.2
1.3
1.7
1.6
2.0
2.4
0.4
1.5
1.9
0.8
1.2
2.0
1.2
1.4
2.0
3.5
2.0
2.5
1.6
1.8
2.0
1.2
1.3
2.0
3.0
3.0
2.3
3.8
3.4
2.5
0.8
0.7
2.0
1.3
1.6
1.8
0.4
0.5
1.6
2.6
2.6
2.0
1.9
1.9
2.0
1.6
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.2
2.5
1.0
1.4
2.0
0.5
0.6
1.0
1.6
1.6
2.0
0.9
1.3
1.9
2.0
2.2
3.0
2.1
2.0
2.5
2.3
1.8
2.0
0.2
0.5
2.0
1.0
1.4
2.0
2.2
2.0
2.0
1.1
0.9
0.8
1.5
2.2
2.8
1.8
2.6
2.5
0.9
1.0
1.2
1.7

1Movements

in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
2Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.

250

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

1.7

2.1

End of Period2
Projections
2016 2017 2018
1.5
1.5
1.9
2.2
1.8
2.3
1.1
1.1
1.6
1.7
1.1
1.8
0.6
1.1
1.5
0.5
0.9
1.6
1.6
1.2
1.4
0.7
1.4
1.5
2.2
1.4
1.7
1.5
1.7
1.9
0.3
1.0
1.1
0.9
2.3
2.6
–0.2
0.9
1.7
1.1
0.5
1.6
0.2
1.3
1.4
2.0
3.3
2.0
0.5
1.7
2.0
1.6
–1.3
3.7
2.1
3.0
3.0
2.4
4.5
2.5
0.1
0.8
0.7
1.0
1.5
1.7
0.3
0.1
0.6
1.2
2.8
2.6
1.3
1.9
1.9
1.4
1.6
1.9
1.4
2.0
2.3
1.7
1.0
1.4
0.0
0.6
0.8
1.7
1.8
1.5
0.0
1.4
1.4
2.6
2.0
2.2
3.5
1.9
2.1
2.0
2.1
2.0
–0.2
0.2
1.0
0.5
1.2
1.6
1.3
2.4
2.0
0.5
1.1
0.9
1.4
1.5
2.2
1.9
2.0
2.9
0.6
0.9
1.0
1.6

1.4

1.9

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)

Commonwealth of Independent States3,4
Russia
Excluding Russia
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Georgia
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyz Republic
Moldova
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Ukraine5
Uzbekistan
Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
Fiji
India
Indonesia
Kiribati
Lao P.D.R.
Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nauru
Nepal
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vietnam
Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria6
Croatia
Hungary
Kosovo
FYR Macedonia
Montenegro
Poland
Romania
Serbia
Turkey

Average
1999–2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

18.8
19.8
15.7
3.3
5.9
49.1
8.0
9.3
11.2
15.5
18.1
10.2
13.5
17.4
4.0
5.7
5.0
0.5
4.9
1.8
3.2
4.9
10.0
2.7
17.1
2.4
3.1
...
2.5
8.9
19.9
...
5.4
...
8.3
5.1
4.3
9.2
11.1
2.6
...
8.3
...
2.8
6.3
15.4
2.5
3.2
6.7
3.3
6.7
...
2.6
...
3.9
19.4
23.5
27.2

11.1
11.7
9.6
3.5
1.6
13.0
1.7
7.3
6.8
0.0
6.4
–2.7
15.9
12.3
2.8
4.9
6.3
1.0
–0.7
–0.7
3.7
10.6
5.0
9.8
0.0
0.6
4.5
0.5
7.7
6.3
2.2
22.4
12.6
1.4
6.9
4.2
14.6
7.1
3.4
–0.8
–0.2
1.4
–0.3
4.3
6.7
4.8
2.2
–0.4
2.5
2.4
4.2
–2.4
–0.7
3.6
3.4
5.6
8.1
6.3

7.2
6.9
8.1
7.3
5.7
7.7
7.1
7.1
8.0
7.4
6.5
4.4
9.4
12.3
5.1
9.4
5.7
0.2
4.0
3.3
3.7
9.5
5.1
–3.9
6.0
1.7
6.2
1.8
3.7
10.2
8.2
–2.0
9.6
1.4
5.1
3.8
–0.2
1.0
6.2
3.3
5.2
3.5
–1.9
2.8
9.2
5.7
3.6
2.1
3.0
1.0
4.9
3.5
1.5
0.4
2.6
6.1
6.1
8.6

9.8
8.4
13.3
7.7
7.9
53.2
8.5
8.3
16.6
7.6
12.4
5.3
8.0
12.4
6.5
11.5
7.3
0.1
5.5
5.4
7.3
9.5
5.3
1.5
7.6
3.2
11.3
5.4
4.1
7.7
2.8
–3.4
9.6
4.7
4.4
4.7
2.9
7.4
6.7
3.8
13.2
6.3
0.5
0.9
18.7
5.5
3.4
3.7
3.4
2.3
3.9
7.3
3.9
3.5
4.3
5.8
11.1
6.5

6.2
5.1
9.2
2.5
1.0
59.2
–0.9
5.1
2.8
4.6
5.8
5.3
0.6
11.9
4.6
6.2
9.3
0.1
2.9
2.6
3.4
10.0
4.0
–3.0
4.3
1.7
10.9
4.3
6.3
15.0
2.8
0.3
8.3
3.6
4.5
3.2
6.2
5.9
7.5
3.0
10.9
1.1
1.4
1.3
9.1
6.1
2.0
2.0
2.4
3.4
5.7
2.5
3.3
4.1
3.7
3.3
7.3
8.9

6.5
6.8
5.7
5.8
2.4
18.3
–0.5
5.8
6.6
4.6
5.0
6.8
–0.3
11.7
4.6
7.5
11.3
0.4
3.0
2.6
2.9
9.4
6.4
–1.5
6.4
2.1
4.0
1.9
2.2
8.6
5.7
–1.1
9.9
3.4
5.0
2.9
–0.2
5.4
6.9
2.2
9.5
2.1
2.0
1.5
6.6
4.5
1.9
–0.1
0.4
2.2
1.6
1.8
2.8
2.2
0.9
4.0
7.7
7.5

8.1
7.8
8.8
3.0
1.4
18.1
3.1
6.7
7.5
5.1
6.1
6.0
12.1
9.1
3.4
7.0
9.9
–0.2
3.9
2.0
0.5
5.8
6.4
2.1
4.1
3.1
2.5
1.1
0.7
12.9
5.1
0.3
9.0
4.1
5.2
4.2
–1.2
5.2
2.8
1.9
0.7
1.2
1.1
0.8
4.1
4.1
1.6
–0.9
–1.6
–0.2
–0.2
0.4
–0.3
–0.7
0.0
1.1
2.1
8.9

15.5
15.5
15.6
3.7
4.0
13.5
4.0
6.7
6.5
9.6
5.8
7.4
48.7
8.5
2.7
6.2
6.3
–0.4
1.2
1.4
1.4
4.9
6.4
0.6
1.3
2.1
1.4
–2.2
–0.2
5.9
10.0
9.8
7.2
0.9
6.0
1.4
1.9
–0.6
2.2
–0.9
0.6
–1.1
3.2
2.5
0.6
3.2
1.9
–1.0
–1.1
–0.5
–0.1
–0.5
–0.3
1.5
–0.9
–0.6
1.4
7.7

2016

Projections
2017 2018 2022

End of Period2
Projections
2016 2017 2018

8.3
7.0
11.3
–1.4
12.4
11.8
2.1
14.6
0.4
6.4
5.9
3.6
13.9
8.0
2.8
5.7
3.9
–0.7
3.0
2.0
3.9
4.5
3.5
1.9
2.0
2.1
0.8
–1.5
0.5
0.6
6.8
8.2
9.9
–1.0
6.7
1.8
0.1
0.5
4.0
0.2
–1.3
2.6
3.5
0.9
2.7
3.3
1.3
–1.1
–1.3
–1.1
0.4
0.3
–0.2
–0.3
–0.6
–1.6
1.1
7.8

5.8
4.2
9.6
1.9
12.0
8.0
6.0
7.3
3.8
6.5
8.9
6.0
12.8
13.0
2.6
5.7
3.5
–0.2
3.7
1.8
3.8
3.8
4.0
2.2
2.3
3.8
2.5
0.7
0.9
4.4
6.5
5.1
4.5
1.5
5.7
3.1
1.8
–0.5
6.0
0.6
1.0
7.5
2.9
2.6
4.4
6.0
2.1
1.8
1.1
1.1
2.5
1.4
0.3
2.1
1.9
1.1
3.4
10.9

6.5
5.4
9.3
–1.1
13.3
10.6
1.8
8.5
–0.5
2.4
6.1
6.2
12.4
7.9
2.7
5.7
3.0
–1.6
3.9
2.1
3.9
3.6
3.0
0.7
3.2
1.8
1.8
–1.5
0.5
0.9
7.0
8.2
10.4
0.4
6.6
2.6
2.3
3.5
4.5
1.1
0.0
6.7
2.6
2.1
4.7
4.2
2.2
–0.3
–0.5
0.2
1.8
1.3
–0.3
1.0
0.8
–0.5
1.5
8.5

5.2
3.9
8.2
3.5
8.0
7.5
3.0
6.5
5.1
5.3
8.0
6.2
10.0
12.7
3.2
5.8
4.2
0.0
3.5
2.4
3.5
4.9
3.9
2.5
2.7
2.9
2.1
1.1
2.0
6.0
6.1
2.0
6.0
2.0
5.5
3.0
1.9
1.7
5.0
1.0
2.7
2.7
2.8
2.8
4.0
5.7
2.8
1.2
1.4
1.2
3.2
1.4
2.6
2.6
2.3
3.3
3.0
9.3

4.6
4.0
5.8
4.0
6.0
7.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
5.0
6.0
6.2
5.0
10.0
3.4
5.6
4.7
0.2
3.0
2.6
3.0
5.0
3.5
2.5
3.1
3.0
2.5
2.1
2.0
6.5
5.7
2.0
5.5
2.0
5.0
3.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
2.5
4.0
2.5
2.5
3.0
4.0
4.9
3.0
2.0
2.1
1.9
3.0
2.0
2.0
1.9
2.5
2.5
3.0
7.5

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

5.4
4.0
8.9
2.1
8.0
8.0
6.2
7.0
4.8
7.0
10.0
6.1
10.0
15.7
3.1
6.0
3.3
0.1
3.1
2.3
3.5
4.5
4.0
2.2
2.3
3.8
2.1
0.7
0.9
6.9
6.5
1.6
2.7
1.5
5.5
2.9
1.4
–2.2
5.1
0.6
2.0
6.6
2.9
2.7
4.0
5.7
2.3
2.3
1.3
1.0
2.7
1.0
1.7
1.6
1.9
2.0
3.6
10.0

251

4.9
4.0
7.2
4.0
7.5
7.5
3.4
6.2
5.5
5.2
8.0
6.2
7.0
10.7
3.2
5.8
4.5
0.3
3.4
2.4
3.5
4.8
3.7
2.5
2.6
2.9
2.2
1.1
2.0
6.5
6.1
2.0
5.7
2.0
5.0
3.0
2.4
1.9
5.0
0.7
3.5
2.5
2.4
2.9
4.0
5.9
3.0
1.4
1.6
1.2
3.0
1.8
1.7
2.6
2.6
3.5
3.0
9.5

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)

Latin America and the Caribbean7
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina8
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela8
Middle East, North Africa,
Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Afghanistan
Algeria
Bahrain
Djibouti
Egypt
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya8
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Sudan9
Syria10
Tunisia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen

252

Average
1999–2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

End of Period2
Projections
Projections
2017 2018
2022 2016
2017 2018

6.7
2.0
7.6
2.2
3.5
2.5
4.7
6.8
3.7
6.9
11.1
2.1
12.8
19.6
3.5
2.9
7.3
6.6
15.3
8.8
10.6
6.3
9.7
2.3
8.6
2.6
3.6
3.0
2.9
21.0
5.9
8.3
20.5

4.6
–0.6
6.3
1.7
3.6
–1.1
3.3
4.9
1.5
4.2
7.8
0.0
1.4
5.2
0.5
–0.3
1.9
3.0
3.4
5.5
9.6
5.3
3.7
2.4
2.6
2.9
2.1
–0.2
0.4
–0.3
7.0
7.1
27.1

4.2
3.4
10.5
1.6
5.8
0.9
2.5
5.0
1.4
2.3
5.7
2.8
6.3
3.6
1.2
3.4
3.9
4.3
4.1
4.7
12.6
4.2
5.5
3.5
4.7
1.5
0.9
3.3
0.8
6.9
10.5
6.7
28.2

5.2
3.5
9.8
3.1
9.4
1.7
9.9
6.6
3.3
3.4
4.9
1.1
8.5
4.5
5.1
3.0
6.2
4.4
7.4
6.8
7.5
3.4
8.1
5.9
8.3
3.4
5.8
2.8
3.2
17.7
5.1
8.1
26.1

4.6
3.4
10.0
1.9
4.5
1.2
4.5
5.4
3.0
3.2
4.5
1.4
3.7
5.1
1.7
2.4
3.8
2.4
6.8
5.2
6.9
4.1
7.2
5.7
3.7
3.7
0.8
4.2
2.6
5.0
9.3
8.1
21.1

4.6
1.1
10.6
0.4
1.8
0.5
5.7
6.2
1.9
2.0
5.2
0.0
4.8
2.7
0.8
0.0
4.3
1.9
6.8
5.2
9.4
3.8
7.1
4.0
2.7
2.8
1.1
1.5
0.8
1.9
5.2
8.6
43.5

4.9
1.1
...
1.2
1.8
1.2
5.8
6.3
4.4
2.9
4.5
0.8
3.0
3.6
1.1
–1.0
3.4
0.7
3.9
6.1
8.3
4.0
6.0
2.6
5.0
3.2
0.2
3.5
0.2
3.4
5.7
8.9
57.3

5.5
1.0
...
1.9
–1.1
–0.9
4.1
9.0
4.3
5.0
0.8
–0.8
0.8
4.0
–0.7
–0.6
2.4
–0.9
7.5
3.2
3.7
2.7
4.0
0.1
3.1
3.5
–2.3
–1.0
–1.7
6.9
4.7
8.7
111.8

5.6
–0.5
...
0.8
1.3
0.6
3.6
8.7
3.8
7.5
0.0
0.0
1.6
1.7
0.6
1.7
4.4
0.8
13.4
2.7
2.3
2.8
3.5
0.7
4.1
3.6
–0.4
–3.1
–0.2
55.5
3.1
9.6
254.4

4.2
3.6
3.4
4.6
4.2
3.6
2.4
1.2
2.0 –1.1
2.5
2.0
26.9
17.8
8.6
...
22.3
16.7
2.4
2.2
2.2
0.8
2.4
2.2
5.0
5.8
2.7
3.2
6.7
2.4
1.8
2.3
2.0
1.1
2.4
2.3
3.2
5.1
5.0
4.0
4.3
5.0
3.7
4.0
4.0
6.3
3.6
4.0
2.3
2.7
3.0
2.8
2.4
2.9
4.3
3.3
3.0
5.7
4.0
3.1
1.7
2.9
3.0
0.8
2.7
3.0
0.6
1.4
2.0 –0.2
1.4
1.4
3.0
3.3
4.0
1.7
2.9
4.2
0.7
0.7
1.6
1.1
0.8
0.7
0.8
2.2
2.0 –0.9
2.4
2.0
2.6
2.0
1.9
0.9
3.0
1.8
4.4
3.5
4.0
4.2
4.3
4.0
2.3
2.7
3.1
1.5
2.6
2.7
14.7
9.0
5.0 12.5
15.3
5.0
4.0
4.0
4.0
3.3
4.5
4.0
3.4
5.2
5.4
1.7
5.0
5.5
5.9
3.8
3.0
3.4
6.1
3.5
4.0
7.2
7.3
3.1
4.0
7.2
1.6
2.1
2.4
1.5
2.5
2.1
3.5
4.0
4.0
3.9
4.0
4.0
3.2
2.3
2.0
3.2
2.7
2.5
1.2
1.8
2.0
0.9
1.5
2.0
0.2
0.9
1.5 –3.0
1.4
1.2
1.7
1.4
1.5
1.0
1.9
1.5
22.3
9.3
4.1 52.4
9.1
12.3
3.2
3.2
3.2
3.1
3.2
3.2
6.1
6.3
6.1
8.1
6.2
6.7
652.7 2,349.3 4,684.8 302.6 1,133.0 2,529.6

6.4
...
2.9
1.2
3.2
5.8
15.6
...
3.8
2.8
2.3
–0.1
6.4
1.9
2.2
6.2
6.3
1.0
...
9.1
4.1
2.7
5.6
11.4

7.3
–6.8
5.7
2.8
1.7
16.2
10.7
–2.2
–0.7
4.6
1.2
2.4
2.1
1.0
3.5
19.6
–4.9
4.1
...
11.3
2.8
3.7
1.6
3.7

6.6
2.2
3.9
2.0
4.0
11.7
12.4
2.4
4.8
4.5
4.0
2.5
6.3
1.0
3.3
10.1
–2.4
3.8
...
13.0
4.4
3.3
0.9
11.2

9.2
11.8
4.5
–0.4
5.1
11.1
21.2
5.6
4.2
4.9
5.0
15.9
5.7
0.9
4.0
13.7
2.0
3.7
...
18.3
...
3.5
0.9
19.5

9.8
6.4
8.9
2.8
3.7
8.6
30.8
6.1
4.5
3.2
6.6
6.1
4.9
1.3
2.9
11.0
1.8
2.9
...
35.4
...
5.1
0.7
9.9

9.2
7.4
3.3
3.3
2.4
6.9
34.7
1.9
4.8
2.7
4.8
2.6
4.1
1.9
1.2
7.4
3.2
3.5
...
36.5
...
5.8
1.1
11.0

6.8
4.7
2.9
2.7
2.9
10.1
15.6
2.2
2.9
3.1
1.9
2.4
3.8
0.4
1.0
8.6
3.4
2.7
...
36.9
...
4.9
2.3
8.2

5.7
–0.7
4.8
1.8
2.1
11.0
11.9
1.4
–0.9
3.7
–3.7
9.8
0.5
1.5
0.1
4.5
1.8
2.2
...
16.9
...
4.9
4.1
39.4

5.1
4.4
6.4
2.8
2.7
10.2
9.0
0.4
–0.8
3.5
–0.8
27.1
1.5
1.6
1.1
2.9
2.7
3.5
...
17.8
...
3.7
1.8
5.0

6.8
6.0
5.5
0.9
3.0
23.5
10.5
2.0
3.3
2.5
3.1
32.8
2.1
0.9
3.2
4.1
0.9
–0.2
...
26.9
...
4.5
2.1
20.0

7.7
6.0
4.4
3.5
3.0
21.3
10.1
2.0
1.5
2.7
2.5
32.1
3.7
1.6
3.2
4.8
4.8
5.0
...
19.0
...
4.4
2.9
29.5

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

4.9
6.0
4.0
1.6
3.0
7.1
8.7
2.0
2.5
2.7
2.0
23.5
4.0
2.0
3.1
5.0
2.3
2.0
...
14.0
...
3.5
1.9
9.0

6.2
4.6
7.0
2.3
2.4
14.0
11.9
–1.0
0.8
3.5
3.1
29.9
2.8
1.8
1.1
3.2
...
1.7
2.3
30.5
...
4.2
1.8
22.0

7.5
7.2
5.5
1.0
3.0
29.8
10.1
2.0
2.5
2.5
3.0
35.1
1.6
1.1
3.2
3.9
...
–0.2
2.9
21.0
...
4.5
2.1
23.0

6.5
6.0
4.4
3.2
3.0
11.7
9.7
2.0
2.5
2.7
2.0
29.9
4.7
1.6
3.2
5.0
...
5.0
2.7
17.0
...
4.1
2.9
24.0

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
South Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe11

Average
1999–2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

10.5
81.6
3.1
8.7
2.6
10.0
2.3
2.4
2.9
1.6
4.0
77.9
2.7
3.0
5.0
16.3
10.2
0.7
6.5
17.7
15.1
3.0
6.8
7.5
...
10.3
17.4
2.2
6.4
10.5
7.6
2.4
11.6
6.8
15.3
2.3
6.3
9.8
5.8
...
7.4
6.1
2.6
5.7
18.5
–7.4

9.8
13.7
0.4
8.1
0.9
10.6
1.0
3.0
3.5
10.1
4.8
46.1
4.3
1.0
5.7
33.0
8.5
1.9
4.6
13.1
4.7
–1.6
10.6
5.8
7.4
9.0
8.4
2.2
2.5
3.3
9.5
4.3
12.5
10.3
17.0
–2.2
31.8
9.2
7.1
...
7.4
12.1
3.7
13.0
13.4
6.2

8.1
14.5
2.2
6.9
–0.6
6.5
2.1
1.3
1.5
–2.1
3.9
23.5
0.4
1.4
5.3
11.2
8.1
1.4
5.0
6.7
15.5
1.1
4.3
3.3
7.3
9.2
7.4
1.3
2.9
12.7
4.9
–2.8
13.7
2.3
13.3
1.2
–2.4
17.8
4.3
...
4.5
7.2
1.4
3.7
8.5
3.0

9.4
13.5
2.7
8.5
2.8
9.6
4.5
2.9
1.2
1.9
2.2
14.9
1.8
4.9
4.8
3.9
33.2
1.3
4.8
7.7
21.4
5.1
14.0
6.0
8.5
9.5
7.6
3.1
6.5
10.4
5.0
2.9
10.8
5.7
14.3
3.4
2.6
18.5
5.0
...
6.1
12.7
3.6
15.0
8.7
3.5

9.3
10.3
6.7
7.5
3.8
18.2
2.5
2.4
5.9
7.7
5.9
0.9
5.0
1.3
3.4
6.0
24.1
2.7
4.6
7.1
15.2
2.1
9.4
5.5
6.8
5.7
21.3
5.3
3.9
2.1
6.7
0.5
12.2
6.3
10.6
1.4
7.1
13.8
5.6
45.1
8.9
16.0
2.6
12.7
6.6
3.7

6.6
8.8
1.0
5.9
0.5
7.9
1.5
2.1
6.6
0.2
1.6
0.9
4.6
2.6
3.2
6.5
8.1
0.5
5.2
11.7
11.9
0.8
5.7
5.0
7.6
5.8
28.3
–0.6
3.5
4.2
5.6
2.3
8.5
4.2
8.1
0.7
4.3
9.8
5.8
0.0
5.6
7.9
1.8
4.9
7.0
1.6

6.3
7.3
–1.1
4.4
–0.3
4.4
–0.2
1.9
11.6
1.7
1.3
1.2
0.9
0.4
4.3
10.0
7.4
4.5
6.3
15.5
9.7
–1.0
6.9
4.6
9.9
6.1
23.8
0.9
3.2
2.3
5.3
–0.9
8.0
1.8
7.0
–1.1
1.4
8.3
6.1
1.7
5.7
6.1
0.2
3.1
7.8
–0.2

7.0
10.3
0.3
3.1
0.9
5.6
0.1
2.7
4.5
6.8
2.0
1.0
2.7
1.2
1.7
9.0
10.1
–0.1
6.8
17.2
8.2
1.5
6.6
4.3
7.7
7.4
21.9
1.4
1.3
2.4
3.4
1.0
9.0
2.5
5.3
0.1
4.0
9.0
4.6
52.8
5.0
5.6
1.8
5.4
10.1
–2.4

11.3
32.4
–0.8
2.8
–0.2
5.5
–1.4
0.9
4.6
–1.1
1.8
18.2
3.6
0.7
1.4
9.0
7.3
2.1
7.2
17.5
8.2
1.5
6.3
6.4
8.8
6.7
21.7
–1.8
1.0
19.2
6.7
0.3
15.7
5.7
5.4
0.9
–1.0
11.5
6.3
379.8
8.0
5.2
0.9
5.5
17.9
–1.6

Projections
2017 2018 2022
11.0
30.9
2.0
3.7
1.5
18.0
1.0
0.7
3.8
0.2
2.0
41.7
–0.4
1.0
1.7
9.0
8.1
2.5
8.3
11.8
8.5
2.8
8.0
6.6
12.8
7.8
13.0
0.2
4.2
17.5
6.0
1.0
16.3
7.1
4.5
2.1
2.8
16.9
5.4
182.2
7.0
5.4
0.8
5.8
6.8
2.5

9.5
20.6
2.1
3.7
2.0
20.2
1.5
1.1
3.7
1.9
2.0
44.0
–1.1
2.0
1.8
9.0
8.0
2.5
7.1
9.0
8.2
2.5
5.2
6.0
9.9
6.8
9.6
1.2
5.0
10.5
5.8
2.1
14.8
6.0
5.2
2.2
2.3
10.6
5.3
45.0
5.4
5.0
1.2
5.6
7.4
9.5

7.8
9.5
2.0
3.9
2.0
17.7
2.0
2.0
3.0
3.0
2.0
10.0
2.4
2.0
2.1
9.0
7.5
2.5
4.7
6.0
7.9
2.5
5.0
5.0
7.1
5.0
3.9
2.2
3.1
5.5
5.8
2.0
14.5
5.0
3.2
2.2
3.0
7.7
5.5
7.5
5.5
5.0
2.0
5.0
8.0
4.0

End of Period2
Projections
2016 2017 2018
12.5
41.9
–2.7
3.0
–1.6
9.5
–0.3
0.3
4.7
–4.9
0.8
23.6
0.8
1.1
1.6
9.0
6.7
4.1
7.9
15.4
8.7
1.6
6.3
4.4
12.5
7.0
20.0
–0.8
2.3
21.1
7.3
–2.4
18.5
7.3
5.1
2.1
–0.2
17.4
6.7
479.7
9.0
5.0
0.5
5.7
7.5
–0.9

10.4
23.4
2.2
4.4
2.0
18.6
1.1
1.2
3.6
0.7
1.9
50.0
–1.3
1.5
1.7
9.0
9.2
2.5
7.6
10.0
8.2
2.5
5.1
6.5
12.4
7.7
11.1
1.0
5.0
14.0
6.0
2.0
16.0
7.0
5.5
2.0
3.0
12.0
5.2
111.4
6.5
5.0
...
5.9
5.8
7.0

1Movements

9.2
17.6
2.0
3.0
2.0
21.5
1.7
1.1
3.6
2.3
2.1
40.0
–0.9
2.0
1.9
9.0
7.5
2.5
6.4
8.0
8.0
2.5
5.2
6.0
9.1
6.8
8.3
1.4
4.0
8.0
5.8
2.0
15.1
5.0
5.0
2.2
3.2
9.5
5.4
25.0
4.4
5.0
...
5.3
8.0
10.0

in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3For many countries, inflation for the earlier years is measured on the basis of a retail price index. Consumer price index (CPI) inflation data with broader and more up-to-date coverage are
typically used for more recent years.
4Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in the group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic
structure.
5Starting in 2014 data exclude Crimea and Sevastopol.
6Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
7Excludes Argentina and Venezuela.
8See country-specific notes for Argentina, Libya, and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
9Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
10Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
11The Zimbabwe dollar ceased circulating in early 2009. Data are based on IMF staff estimates of price and exchange rate developments in US dollars. IMF staff estimates of US dollar values may
differ from authorities’ estimates.
2Monthly

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

253

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt1
(Percent of GDP unless noted otherwise)

Major Advanced Economies
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
United States
Net Lending/Borrowing3
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
Euro Area
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
Germany
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
France
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
Italy
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2,4
Net Debt
Gross Debt
Japan
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt5
United Kingdom
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
Canada
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt

Average
1999–2008

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Projections
2018

2022

–3.4
0.9
–3.8

–7.3
–2.4
–6.3

–6.3
–2.1
–5.1

–4.2
–1.9
–3.7

–3.6
–1.4
–3.1

–3.0
–0.7
–2.8

–3.5
–0.7
–3.1

–3.4
–0.1
–3.3

–2.9
0.2
–2.9

–2.7
0.3
–2.8

–3.5
1.8
–4.0
43.2
62.6

–9.6
–3.1
–8.2
76.8
100.0

–7.9
–2.2
–6.4
80.2
103.4

–4.4
–1.9
–4.4
81.6
105.4

–4.0
–1.1
–3.8
80.8
105.1

–3.5
0.0
–3.6
80.2
105.2

–4.4
–0.1
–4.1
81.3
107.1

–4.3
0.3
–4.4
82.5
108.1

–3.7
0.7
–4.0
81.1
107.8

–4.3
0.6
–4.5
82.8
109.6

–2.0
0.9
–2.5
54.5
67.9

–4.2
–0.5
–3.9
68.5
86.1

–3.6
–1.9
–2.1
72.2
89.5

–3.0
–2.8
–1.3
74.6
91.4

–2.6
–2.4
–1.1
74.9
91.9

–2.1
–1.9
–0.9
73.9
90.0

–1.5
–1.3
–0.8
73.3
89.0

–1.3
–0.5
–0.9
71.8
87.4

–1.0
0.0
–0.9
70.3
85.6

–0.1
0.6
–0.4
62.7
76.3

–2.1
0.1
–2.2
50.3
62.6

–1.0
1.0
–1.3
58.7
78.7

0.0
0.5
–0.2
58.2
79.9

–0.1
–0.3
0.1
57.0
77.5

0.3
0.1
0.5
53.5
74.7

0.6
0.1
0.6
50.5
70.9

0.8
0.4
0.6
48.3
68.1

0.7
0.8
0.3
45.8
65.0

0.8
1.0
0.2
43.2
61.8

1.1
0.8
0.7
33.7
50.1

–2.6
0.5
–3.0
54.6
63.1

–5.1
–1.1
–4.4
76.9
85.2

–4.8
–1.9
–3.4
80.6
89.5

–4.0
–2.4
–2.4
83.5
92.3

–3.9
–2.5
–2.3
86.1
94.9

–3.6
–2.4
–2.0
86.9
95.6

–3.4
–2.2
–1.9
87.8
96.3

–3.0
–1.8
–1.8
88.5
96.8

–3.0
–1.3
–2.2
88.7
97.0

–0.8
0.3
–1.0
82.9
91.2

–2.9
0.2
–3.6
94.7
102.9

–3.7
–0.5
–4.1
106.8
116.5

–2.9
–2.8
–1.5
111.6
123.4

–2.9
–4.1
–0.6
116.7
129.0

–3.0
–4.1
–1.1
118.8
131.8

–2.7
–3.3
–0.9
119.8
132.1

–2.4
–2.7
–1.1
120.6
132.6

–2.2
–1.6
–1.4
121.2
133.0

–1.3
–1.0
–0.8
119.9
131.4

0.0
0.0
0.0
109.6
120.1

–5.5
–0.8
–5.5
64.2
165.8

–9.1
–4.6
–7.5
117.9
230.6

–8.3
–3.7
–7.1
120.5
236.6

–7.6
–2.2
–7.1
117.4
240.5

–5.4
–2.6
–5.1
119.0
242.1

–3.5
–2.1
–3.9
118.4
238.1

–4.2
–1.8
–3.8
119.8
239.3

–4.1
–0.9
–3.9
120.9
240.3

–3.3
–0.7
–3.2
120.7
240.0

–2.1
–0.7
–2.0
114.6
233.9

–1.9
0.8
–2.5
34.9
39.5

–7.5
–2.6
–5.4
73.2
81.6

–7.7
–2.6
–5.7
76.4
85.1

–5.5
–2.1
–3.9
77.8
86.2

–5.6
–0.7
–4.8
79.7
88.1

–4.3
–0.2
–4.1
80.3
89.0

–2.9
–0.1
–2.8
80.1
89.3

–2.9
–0.1
–2.8
80.5
89.5

–2.3
–0.2
–2.2
80.6
89.7

–1.2
0.0
–1.2
76.6
85.6

1.1
1.6
0.3
34.1
75.6

–3.3
–1.0
–2.8
27.1
81.5

–2.5
–1.3
–1.8
28.2
84.8

–1.5
–0.9
–1.0
29.0
85.8

0.0
–0.5
0.0
27.2
85.4

–1.1
–1.2
–0.5
25.2
91.6

–1.9
–1.5
–1.1
27.4
92.4

–2.2
–0.2
–2.1
24.6
89.6

–1.8
0.4
–2.1
22.7
87.7

–1.1
0.1
–1.2
14.9
79.9

Note: The methodology and specific assumptions for each country are discussed in Box A1. The country group composites for fiscal data are calculated as the sum of the US dollar values
for the relevant individual countries.
1Debt data refer to the end of the year and are not always comparable across countries. Gross and net debt levels reported by national statistical agencies for countries that have adopted
the System of National Accounts (SNA) 2008 (Australia, Canada, Hong Kong SAR, United States) are adjusted to exclude unfunded pension liabilities of government employees’
defined-benefit pension plans. Fiscal data for the aggregated major advanced economies and the United States start in 2001, and the average for the aggregate and the United States is
therefore for the period 2001–07.
2Percent of potential GDP.
3Figures reported by the national statistical agency are adjusted to exclude items related to the accrual-basis accounting of government employees’ defined-benefit pension plans.
4Excludes one-time measures based on the authorities’ data and, if unavailable, on receipts from the sale of assets.
5Includes equity shares; nonconsolidated basis.

254

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices
(Annual percent change)
Averages
1999–2008 2009–18
Trade in Goods and Services
World Trade1
Volume
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
In SDRs
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Trade in Goods
World Trade1
Volume
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
In SDRs
World Trade Prices in US Dollars2
Manufactures
Oil
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
Food
Beverages
Agricultural Raw Materials
Metal
World Trade Prices in SDRs2
Manufactures
Oil
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
Food
Beverages
Agricultural Raw Materials
Metal
World Trade Prices in Euros2
Manufactures
Oil
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
Food
Beverages
Agricultural Raw Materials
Metal

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Projections
2017
2018

6.6

3.1

–10.5

12.5

7.1

2.7

3.6

3.8

2.8

2.4

4.2

4.0

4.4
2.9

–1.2
0.0

–10.4
–8.2

5.5
6.6

11.2
7.4

–1.6
1.4

–0.7
0.1

–1.8
–1.7

–13.3
–5.9

–4.1
–3.5

3.8
4.2

2.3
0.5

5.6
8.8

2.8
3.8

–11.1
–8.0

12.1
13.7

6.0
8.6

2.3
3.5

3.2
4.8

4.0
3.2

3.8
1.8

2.2
2.5

3.8
4.8

3.6
4.5

5.6
9.9

2.6
4.0

–11.6
–9.3

11.4
14.6

5.1
11.5

1.2
5.2

2.4
5.2

3.8
4.3

4.6
–0.9

2.7
2.0

4.0
4.4

3.8
4.9

–0.5
2.7

0.3
–0.6

2.5
–5.7

–0.9
2.1

–1.6
4.2

–0.7
0.5

0.9
–0.6

0.3
–0.6

1.9
–4.3

0.9
–1.2

–0.4
0.1

0.2
–0.5

6.7

3.0

–11.7

14.5

7.0

2.3

3.3

3.1

2.3

2.3

4.3

4.1

4.5
2.9

–1.4
–0.3

–11.7
–9.5

6.4
7.6

12.6
8.8

–1.7
1.3

–1.2
–0.5

–2.5
–2.4

–14.4
–7.1

–4.8
–4.2

4.3
4.7

2.1
0.4

1.7
22.2
6.2
5.6
2.4
1.9
11.8

–0.1
–6.4
–0.7
–0.5
–0.1
–0.1
–1.4

–1.4
–36.3
–16.0
–15.2
1.6
–17.1
–19.2

2.3
27.9
26.6
12.1
14.1
33.2
48.2

4.2
31.6
18.0
20.3
16.6
22.7
13.5

2.8
1.0
–10.1
–2.6
–18.6
–12.7
–16.8

–3.0
–0.9
–1.4
0.7
–11.9
1.6
–4.3

–0.4
–7.5
–3.9
–4.1
20.7
2.0
–10.1

–2.3
–47.2
–17.5
–17.2
–3.1
–13.5
–23.0

–5.2
–15.7
–1.8
2.1
–5.0
–5.7
–5.4

1.5
17.4
7.1
3.6
–8.7
2.1
20.6

1.0
–0.2
0.5
1.1
0.6
–2.5
1.4

0.2
20.3
4.6
4.0
0.9
0.4
10.1

1.1
–5.3
0.5
0.7
1.1
1.1
–0.3

1.0
–34.8
–13.9
–13.1
4.1
–15.1
–17.2

3.3
29.3
28.0
13.3
15.3
34.6
49.8

0.7
27.2
14.1
16.2
12.7
18.5
9.7

6.0
4.1
–7.3
0.4
–16.1
–10.0
–14.3

–2.2
–0.1
–0.6
1.5
–11.2
2.4
–3.5

–0.4
–7.5
–3.8
–4.0
20.8
2.0
–10.1

6.1
–42.7
–10.4
–10.2
5.2
–6.1
–16.4

–4.5
–15.1
–1.2
2.8
–4.4
–5.1
–4.8

1.9
17.8
7.5
4.0
–8.4
2.4
21.1

–0.7
–1.9
–1.2
–0.6
–1.1
–4.1
–0.3

–1.1
18.8
3.3
2.7
–0.4
–0.9
8.7

2.2
–4.3
1.6
1.8
2.2
2.2
0.8

4.2
–32.7
–11.2
–10.4
7.3
–12.5
–14.6

7.3
34.3
32.9
17.7
19.8
39.8
55.5

–0.6
25.5
12.6
14.7
11.2
17.0
8.3

11.3
9.3
–2.7
5.4
–11.9
–5.5
–10.0

–6.1
–4.1
–4.5
–2.5
–14.7
–1.7
–7.3

–0.5
–7.6
–3.9
–4.1
20.7
1.9
–10.2

17.1
–36.8
–1.2
–0.9
16.1
3.6
–7.8

–4.9
–15.4
–1.6
2.4
–4.8
–5.5
–5.2

–0.4
15.2
5.0
1.7
–10.5
0.1
18.4

–3.2
–4.3
–3.6
–3.1
–3.5
–6.5
–2.8

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

255

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Averages
1999–2008 2009–18
Trade in Goods
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Fuel Exporters
Nonfuel Exporters
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Fuel Exporters
Nonfuel Exporters
Price Deflators in SDRs
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Fuel Exporters
Nonfuel Exporters
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Fuel Exporters
Nonfuel Exporters
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States3
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan
Middle East and North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Memorandum
World Exports in Billions of US Dollars
Goods and Services
Goods
Average Oil Price4
In US Dollars a Barrel
Export Unit Value of Manufactures5

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Projections
2017
2018

5.6
8.9
5.7
10.1

2.7
3.7
1.8
4.4

–13.0
–8.3
–6.5
–9.1

14.9
15.1
6.5
18.5

6.0
7.6
5.7
8.4

1.9
3.8
2.7
4.2

2.7
4.7
2.0
5.9

3.4
2.7
–0.6
4.1

3.1
1.5
3.5
0.8

1.9
2.6
1.3
3.0

4.1
4.4
0.1
5.5

3.6
4.3
3.4
4.6

5.7
9.9
11.4
9.6

2.4
3.8
0.5
4.5

–12.7
–10.7
–16.0
–9.4

13.1
15.6
8.0
17.6

5.3
11.1
11.6
11.0

0.3
5.0
8.2
4.3

2.1
4.8
4.0
5.0

3.5
2.6
0.7
3.0

3.7
–0.3
–8.0
1.5

2.3
2.4
–4.4
3.8

4.5
4.4
0.4
5.2

3.9
5.0
3.2
5.3

1.7
6.6
14.6
3.7

–0.3
–0.3
–3.1
0.6

–7.4
–13.1
–25.9
–6.9

4.3
12.7
21.6
9.1

6.4
13.3
25.6
8.4

–0.3
3.1
4.5
2.5

0.3
–1.3
–2.4
–0.8

–2.0
–3.2
–6.7
–1.6

–6.1
–9.1
–30.0
–1.0

–2.2
–7.0
–13.1
–5.4

4.0
5.7
12.8
3.9

1.2
–0.9
–1.2
–0.8

2.5
3.7
3.3
3.8

–0.6
0.4
0.9
0.2

–10.7
–7.2
–2.1
–8.4

6.3
10.8
8.2
11.4

8.7
8.3
6.6
8.7

1.0
2.6
3.5
2.4

–0.5
–0.7
0.0
–0.9

–2.1
–2.7
–2.4
–2.8

–7.9
–5.2
–3.2
–5.6

–3.4
–5.8
–3.9
–6.2

4.1
5.6
3.4
6.1

0.8
–0.4
–0.3
–0.5

–0.8
2.8

0.3
–0.7

3.7
–6.3

–1.9
1.7

–2.1
4.6

–1.2
0.5

0.9
–0.6

0.1
–0.5

1.9
–4.2

1.3
–1.3

0.0
0.1

0.4
–0.4

7.6
–1.6
0.1
3.7

–3.2
0.5
0.1
–0.8

–25.8
2.6
3.6
–5.4

12.8
–6.1
–3.7
8.6

20.7
–2.3
–1.9
5.6

1.8
1.2
–1.1
–1.3

–6.6
0.9
1.5
–1.4

–1.5
2.3
1.3
–2.4

–20.0
8.8
2.7
–9.0

–12.1
0.4
1.6
1.8

9.1
–2.5
–3.6
–0.2

–0.4
0.0
1.4
–2.6

9.5
10.0
5.4

–3.5
–3.6
–1.2

–17.9
–18.3
–11.0

7.6
7.5
12.0

13.5
13.7
11.6

0.3
0.9
–1.9

–0.3
–0.3
–0.2

–4.7
–4.7
–3.3

–26.5
–27.3
–15.9

–6.4
–7.0
–2.2

6.9
7.2
4.1

–0.3
–0.7
–1.4

10.9
–0.1

–4.0
0.4

–24.3
1.6

12.4
–2.1

17.8
–0.3

1.0
0.1

–2.4
0.1

–4.4
1.2

–27.7
4.8

–9.6
0.9

9.1
–2.0

–1.0
–0.3

11,471
9,123
22.2
44.79
1.7

21,362
16,743
–6.4
74.42
–0.1

15,750
12,234
–36.3
61.78
–1.4

18,707
14,908
27.9
79.03
2.3

22,275
17,930
31.6
104.01
4.2

22,505
18,061
1.0
105.01
2.8

23,223
18,489
–0.9
104.07
–3.0

23,647
18,585
–7.5
96.25
–0.4

20,996
16,185
–47.2
50.79
–2.3

20,614
15,756
–15.7
42.84
–5.2

1Average

22,260 23,645
17,122 18,160
17.4
–0.2
50.28 50.17
1.5
1.0

of annual percent change for world exports and imports.
represented, respectively, by the export unit value index for manufactures of the advanced economies and accounting for 83 percent of the advanced economies’ trade (export of goods) weights;
the average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices; and the average of world market prices for nonfuel primary commodities weighted by their 2002–04 shares in
world commodity exports.
3Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure.
4Percent change of average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices.
5Percent change for manufactures exported by the advanced economies.
2As

256

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
(Billions of US dollars)

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Russia
Excluding Russia
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India
ASEAN-53
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan
Sub-Saharan Africa
South Africa
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2012–16
Memorandum
World
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa

Projections
2018

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

–78.5
–372.5
–9.3
196.7
–22.5
–41.4
–64.3
145.3
–70.1
–40.4
206.9
238.8

13.9
–430.7
0.4
192.3
–22.2
–72.7
–56.2
221.0
–66.6
–58.2
287.0
277.6

–29.1
–444.6
–0.8
229.7
–28.3
–68.6
–47.4
129.8
–46.6
–49.6
270.7
374.3

28.3
–426.2
177.1
248.9
–32.7
–7.5
–3.1
59.7
–97.4
–65.7
279.4
357.6

238.5
–349.5
291.3
251.8
–24.6
20.5
20.7
45.9
–119.6
–59.4
354.6
173.2

251.9
–373.8
332.3
289.7
–36.2
40.5
14.9
36.8
–140.0
–43.6
371.9
168.4

325.1
–434.6
373.3
288.5
–10.7
26.3
16.3
134.1
–122.7
–52.8
371.1
–51.1

361.1
–451.7
412.7
290.4
–24.7
47.3
23.8
188.1
–114.5
–50.5
369.8
–96.2

390.6
–462.0
382.7
296.0
–28.9
52.8
24.3
175.0
–91.4
–55.6
373.1
–92.0

368.3
–528.7
402.9
304.3
–21.4
47.5
28.3
191.1
–86.6
–51.2
366.6
–147.2

388.4
–578.5
399.8
307.6
–1.7
16.8
31.9
201.9
–74.0
–43.7
398.9
–387.2

42.9
50.4
–7.4
274.3
243.3
–38.4
66.1
–53.9
–34.5
–26.3
–8.6

68.5
67.5
1.0
233.4
237.8
–47.9
45.4
–86.9
–97.9
–75.8
–5.6

107.3
97.3
10.0
100.2
136.1
–76.4
49.4
–119.5
–114.8
–77.0
–13.2

67.6
71.3
–3.7
122.3
215.4
–87.8
6.4
–81.9
–135.4
–74.2
–15.8

17.3
33.4
–16.1
99.4
148.2
–32.3
–3.6
–72.0
–165.0
–74.8
–31.1

57.0
57.5
–0.5
230.9
236.0
–26.8
22.3
–59.0
–184.1
–104.2
–23.1

53.0
68.8
–15.9
313.1
304.2
–22.1
30.8
–35.8
–172.9
–59.4
–28.8

–0.2
25.5
–25.8
222.7
196.4
–15.2
45.9
–32.6
–99.0
–23.5
–23.0

18.1
41.5
–23.4
155.8
162.5
–33.7
36.9
–45.7
–107.9
–29.0
–19.8

26.8
48.4
–21.5
125.1
152.0
–40.5
27.9
–52.0
–131.4
–39.2
–25.2

56.1
72.6
–16.5
–97.4
28.8
–95.1
–12.1
–70.3
–181.4
–52.9
–34.2

36.0
–26.0
–8.1

170.5
–10.0
–5.6

413.1
–11.9
–9.2

412.1
–27.1
–20.3

331.8
–38.4
–21.6

190.1
–66.6
–18.7

–116.5
–92.0
–14.0

–128.2
–58.9
–9.6

–60.1
–52.2
–9.8

–54.4
–61.4
–11.8

–5.6
–88.6
–15.8

131.3
109.0
–2.5

309.5
–30.1
–9.4

616.8
–242.5
–26.0

597.1
–239.5
–61.3

462.1
–288.9
–76.9

308.4
–140.0
–50.2

–68.5
17.4
–52.8

–85.7
–10.5
–40.5

10.9
–102.9
–48.8

18.2
–165.5
–55.8

99.0
–486.2
–81.6

–165.1

–282.3

–385.3

–430.7

–399.2

–365.9

–301.5

–209.2

–248.5

–295.9

–468.5

–27.0

–19.6

–31.7

–46.4

–48.9

–34.6

–43.3

–49.5

–35.5

–33.6

–55.0

160.3
–19.9
–17.4
40.2

291.5
2.1
–15.2
170.0

345.2
78.0
–21.7
408.1

385.9
203.8
–31.2
414.5

411.7
300.5
–41.2
334.2

420.3
310.2
–48.1
192.1

274.0
359.9
–77.0
–114.4

264.9
359.7
–44.5
–124.7

298.6
404.9
–43.8
–49.0

221.0
432.7
–54.9
–38.6

1.2
431.1
–97.5
8.4

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

257

2022

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of GDP)

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Emerging Market and Developing
Economies
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Russia
Excluding Russia
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India
ASEAN-53
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan
Sub-Saharan Africa
South Africa
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2012–16
Memorandum
World
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa

258

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Projections
2018

2022

–0.2
–2.6
–0.1
5.7
–0.8
–1.9
–4.3
2.8
–3.0
–2.9
4.2

0.0
–2.9
0.0
5.6
–0.8
–3.4
–3.9
3.9
–2.7
–3.6
5.0

–0.1
–2.9
0.0
6.1
–1.0
–3.0
–3.2
2.1
–1.8
–2.8
4.1

0.1
–2.6
1.4
7.0
–1.2
–0.4
–0.2
1.0
–3.7
–3.6
4.2

0.5
–2.1
2.2
6.7
–0.9
1.0
1.5
0.9
–4.4
–3.2
5.2

0.5
–2.1
2.5
7.4
–1.3
1.9
1.1
0.8
–4.7
–2.4
5.4

0.7
–2.4
3.2
8.5
–0.4
1.4
1.4
3.1
–4.3
–3.4
5.9

0.8
–2.4
3.5
8.3
–1.0
2.6
1.9
3.8
–4.4
–3.3
5.7

0.8
–2.4
3.1
8.1
–1.1
2.7
1.9
3.6
–3.6
–3.4
5.4

0.7
–2.6
3.0
7.7
–0.8
2.3
2.0
3.8
–3.3
–2.9
5.0

0.7
–2.5
2.6
6.9
–0.1
0.7
2.0
3.7
–2.5
–2.1
4.7

1.3

1.2

1.4

1.3

0.6

0.5

–0.2

–0.3

–0.3

–0.4

–0.9

2.5
3.8
–1.8
3.4
4.7
–2.8
4.9
–3.4
–0.9
–1.6
–1.0

3.2
4.1
0.2
2.4
3.9
–2.8
2.7
–5.0
–1.9
–3.4
–0.5

4.0
4.7
1.7
0.9
1.8
–4.2
2.6
–6.3
–2.0
–2.9
–1.1

2.4
3.2
–0.6
1.0
2.5
–4.8
0.3
–4.4
–2.3
–3.0
–1.3

0.6
1.5
–2.3
0.7
1.5
–1.7
–0.2
–3.6
–2.8
–3.0
–2.5

2.1
2.8
–0.1
1.5
2.2
–1.3
1.1
–2.9
–3.1
–4.2
–1.8

2.8
5.0
–3.0
2.0
2.7
–1.1
1.5
–2.0
–3.4
–3.3
–2.5

0.0
2.0
–5.6
1.4
1.7
–0.7
2.1
–1.8
–2.0
–1.3
–2.2

0.9
2.8
–4.6
0.9
1.4
–1.4
1.6
–2.4
–2.0
–1.4
–1.7

1.3
3.2
–4.0
0.7
1.2
–1.5
1.1
–2.5
–2.3
–1.8
–2.0

2.2
4.0
–2.2
–0.4
0.2
–2.4
–0.3
–2.8
–2.6
–2.0
–2.2

1.5
–2.4
–2.7

6.2
–0.8
–1.5

12.8
–0.8
–2.2

12.4
–1.8
–5.1

9.7
–2.4
–5.9

5.5
–3.9
–5.3

–3.7
–6.1
–4.4

–4.1
–4.2
–3.3

–1.9
–3.4
–2.9

–1.6
–3.6
–3.3

–0.1
–4.1
–3.8

3.3
0.7
–0.2

6.5
–0.2
–0.7

10.5
–1.2
–1.6

9.7
–1.1
–3.7

7.3
–1.2
–4.5

5.0
–0.6
–3.0

–1.4
0.1
–3.2

–1.9
0.0
–2.6

0.2
–0.4
–2.7

0.4
–0.6
–3.0

1.6
–1.2
–3.3

–1.8

–2.5

–3.0

–3.3

–2.9

–2.6

–2.4

–1.6

–1.8

–2.0

–2.4

–4.9

–3.1

–4.5

–6.0

–6.0

–4.3

–5.6

–6.4

–4.9

–4.3

–4.9

0.3
–0.1
–1.6
1.8

0.4
0.0
–1.2
6.6

0.5
0.4
–1.5
13.6

0.5
1.2
–1.9
13.5

0.5
1.7
–2.3
10.6

0.5
1.7
–2.5
6.0

0.4
2.2
–4.2
–4.0

0.4
2.2
–2.5
–4.4

0.4
2.4
–2.3
–1.7

0.3
2.4
–2.6
–1.3

0.0
2.1
–3.3
0.2

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of exports of goods and services)

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Emerging Market and Developing
Economies
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Russia
Excluding Russia
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India
ASEAN-53
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan
Sub-Saharan Africa
South Africa
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2012–16
Memorandum
World
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa
1Excludes
2Georgia,

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Projections
2018

2022

–0.8
–23.5
–0.4
15.2
–3.4
–8.4
–18.9
21.7
–11.2
–10.4
7.8

0.1
–23.2
0.0
13.3
–3.1
–13.5
–15.3
25.4
–9.7
–12.4
8.8

–0.2
–20.9
0.0
13.6
–3.4
–11.1
–11.0
13.9
–5.9
–9.1
7.0

0.2
–19.2
5.5
15.3
–4.1
–1.3
–0.8
6.5
–12.3
–11.9
7.1

1.7
–15.2
8.6
14.7
–2.9
3.3
4.7
5.5
–14.8
–10.7
8.7

1.7
–15.7
9.3
16.3
–4.2
6.4
3.3
4.3
–16.6
–7.7
9.1

2.4
–19.2
11.7
18.2
–1.4
4.8
4.1
17.1
–15.5
–10.8
10.2

2.7
–20.5
12.8
18.1
–3.3
8.5
5.8
23.2
–15.4
–10.7
10.3

2.7
–19.7
...
17.2
–3.6
8.9
5.4
20.3
–12.0
–10.6
9.7

2.4
–21.5
...
16.2
–2.6
7.3
5.7
21.3
–11.0
–9.0
9.0

2.1
–19.5
...
13.7
–0.2
2.1
5.2
20.2
–9.0
–6.5
8.2

4.3

4.0

4.5

3.9

2.0

2.1

–0.5

–1.2

–1.2

–1.8

–3.7

8.2
14.7
–4.1
12.5
19.5
–13.8
10.9
–10.3
–4.3
–14.6
–3.5

10.2
15.3
0.5
8.3
14.8
–12.6
6.1
–14.8
–9.7
–32.7
–1.8

12.1
17.0
3.2
2.9
6.8
–16.8
5.5
–17.3
–9.2
–26.3
–3.6

7.4
12.1
–1.1
3.3
9.9
–19.4
0.7
–11.9
–10.7
–26.4
–4.1

1.9
5.6
–5.3
2.6
6.3
–6.9
–0.4
–9.7
–13.1
–26.8
–7.8

6.8
10.2
–0.2
5.7
9.6
–5.6
2.3
–7.5
–14.9
–39.5
–5.5

9.0
17.5
–8.2
8.2
12.9
–5.3
3.4
–5.1
–16.1
–26.5
–7.1

0.0
7.7
–14.8
6.1
8.9
–3.4
5.0
–4.5
–9.5
–10.8
–5.8

3.1
10.6
–11.6
3.9
6.9
–6.8
3.7
–5.7
–9.5
–12.2
–4.5

4.3
11.9
–10.1
3.0
6.2
–7.5
2.6
–6.0
–11.1
–16.2
–5.5

7.3
14.6
–6.1
–1.9
1.0
–12.1
–0.9
–6.2
–12.3
–18.5
–5.6

2.9
–8.6
–9.8

13.6
–2.6
–5.2

27.0
–2.4
–7.3

24.3
–5.7
–17.3

20.8
–8.0
–19.0

13.6
–14.7
–17.0

–9.4
–26.6
–14.5

–11.5
–18.8
–10.8

–5.2
–14.9
–10.2

–4.8
–16.5
–12.1

–0.3
–19.1
–14.0

8.7
2.8
–0.8

16.5
–0.6
–2.5

25.2
–4.1
–5.8

22.5
–4.0
–14.3

18.3
–4.6
–18.1

13.6
–2.2
–12.1

–3.6
0.3
–14.8

–5.5
–0.2
–11.7

0.6
–1.6
–13.0

0.8
–2.5
–14.2

4.9
–5.7
–16.6

–6.9

–9.5

–10.7

–11.8

–10.6

–9.6

–8.9

–6.2

–6.6

–7.4

–8.8

–16.8

–9.9

–13.5

–20.2

–21.4

–16.5

–25.3

–31.9

–20.2

–17.3

–21.2

1.0
–0.3
–5.9
3.4

1.5
0.0
–4.1
13.9

1.5
1.0
–4.6
27.3

1.6
2.8
–6.5
25.0

1.8
3.9
–8.0
21.4

1.9
3.9
–9.1
14.0

1.3
5.0
–16.0
–9.4

1.3
5.0
–9.3
–11.5

1.3
5.2
–8.1
–4.3

0.9
5.1
–9.2
–3.6

0.0
4.3
–11.3
0.6

the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic

structure.
3Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

259

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table A11. Advanced Economies: Balance on Current Account
(Percent of GDP)

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area1
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Netherlands
Belgium
Austria
Greece
Portugal
Ireland
Finland
Slovak Republic
Lithuania
Slovenia
Luxembourg
Latvia
Estonia
Cyprus
Malta
Japan
United Kingdom
Korea
Canada
Australia
Taiwan Province of China
Switzerland
Sweden
Singapore
Hong Kong SAR
Norway
Czech Republic
Israel
Denmark
New Zealand
Puerto Rico
Macao SAR
Iceland
San Marino
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Euro Area2
1Data
2Data

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Projections
2018

2022

–0.2
–2.6
–0.1
5.7
–0.8
–1.9
–4.3
5.8
–1.1
2.6
–12.3
–10.4
–4.7
1.9
–3.4
2.1
–0.6
7.2
7.8
2.5
–7.7
–6.6
2.8
–3.0
3.7
–2.9
–4.6
10.9
7.4
6.0
16.8
9.9
10.6
–2.3
3.3
3.5
–2.2
...
28.2
–9.6
...

0.0
–2.9
0.0
5.6
–0.8
–3.4
–3.9
7.4
1.8
2.9
–11.4
–10.1
–1.2
1.2
–4.7
–0.3
–0.1
6.7
2.0
1.8
–11.3
–4.7
3.9
–2.7
2.6
–3.6
–3.6
8.9
14.8
6.0
23.4
7.0
10.9
–3.6
3.7
6.6
–2.3
...
39.4
–6.6
...

–0.1
–2.9
0.0
6.1
–1.0
–3.0
–3.2
9.1
–1.1
1.6
–10.0
–6.0
–1.6
–1.8
–5.0
–3.9
0.2
6.0
–3.2
1.3
–4.1
–0.2
2.1
–1.8
1.6
–2.8
–3.0
8.2
8.0
5.5
22.1
5.6
12.4
–2.1
2.2
6.6
–2.8
...
40.9
–5.3
...

0.1
–2.6
1.4
7.0
–1.2
–0.4
–0.2
10.8
–0.1
1.5
–3.8
–1.8
–2.6
–1.9
0.9
–1.2
2.1
5.9
–3.6
–2.4
–6.0
1.7
1.0
–3.7
4.2
–3.6
–4.1
9.5
10.4
5.6
17.4
1.6
12.4
–1.6
0.4
6.3
–3.9
...
39.3
–4.0
...

0.5
–2.1
2.2
6.7
–0.9
1.0
1.5
9.9
–0.3
2.0
–2.0
1.6
2.1
–1.6
1.9
1.5
4.4
5.6
–2.7
–0.1
–4.9
2.8
0.9
–4.4
6.2
–3.2
–3.2
10.4
11.5
5.3
16.9
1.5
10.2
–0.5
3.1
7.8
–3.2
...
40.2
6.0
...

0.5
–2.1
2.5
7.4
–1.3
1.9
1.1
8.9
–0.7
2.4
–1.6
0.1
1.6
–1.3
1.1
3.6
5.8
5.0
–2.0
1.0
–4.3
9.6
0.8
–4.7
6.0
–2.4
–2.9
12.0
8.7
4.6
19.7
1.4
11.0
0.2
4.0
8.9
–3.2
...
34.2
4.0
...

0.7
–2.4
3.2
8.5
–0.4
1.4
1.4
8.6
0.4
1.9
0.1
0.1
10.9
–0.6
0.2
–2.3
4.4
5.1
–0.8
2.3
–2.9
5.3
3.1
–4.3
7.7
–3.4
–4.7
14.5
11.4
4.7
18.1
3.3
8.7
0.2
4.8
9.2
–3.4
...
25.4
5.4
...

0.8
–2.4
3.5
8.3
–1.0
2.6
1.9
8.5
–0.4
1.7
–0.6
0.7
3.3
–1.1
–0.7
–0.9
5.2
4.7
1.5
1.9
–5.3
7.9
3.8
–4.4
7.0
–3.3
–2.6
14.0
10.5
4.5
19.0
4.6
5.0
1.1
3.6
7.9
–2.8
...
27.4
7.9
...

0.8
–2.4
3.1
8.1
–1.1
2.7
1.9
10.0
–0.3
2.1
–0.2
0.4
3.4
0.4
0.3
–1.6
5.0
4.7
–0.3
1.8
–3.8
8.9
3.6
–3.6
5.6
–3.4
–1.6
13.8
9.9
3.9
19.6
3.0
5.5
0.6
4.1
7.3
–3.6
...
33.0
6.2
...

0.7
–2.6
3.0
7.7
–0.8
2.3
2.0
10.0
0.0
2.2
–0.1
0.3
3.5
0.4
0.2
–1.4
4.9
4.9
–1.5
1.4
–2.7
8.8
3.8
–3.3
5.4
–2.9
–2.4
13.9
9.4
3.7
19.5
3.1
5.7
0.1
3.1
7.0
–3.8
...
34.5
6.1
...

0.7
–2.5
2.6
6.9
–0.1
0.7
2.0
9.3
0.8
2.2
0.0
–1.4
4.0
0.4
1.2
–2.6
2.7
5.5
–2.1
–2.0
–3.7
8.4
3.7
–2.5
5.3
–2.1
–2.3
14.6
8.6
3.0
16.9
3.5
6.1
–1.4
3.2
6.2
–3.9
...
37.0
5.1
...

–0.6
0.4

–0.7
0.5

–0.8
0.8

–0.9
2.2

–0.7
2.8

–0.6
3.0

–0.5
3.7

–0.3
3.5

–0.3
3.6

–0.4
3.5

–0.4
3.2

corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions.
calculated as the sum of the balances of individual euro area countries.

260

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account
(Percent of GDP)

States1

Commonwealth of Independent
Russia
Excluding Russia
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Georgia
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyz Republic
Moldova
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Ukraine 2
Uzbekistan
Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
Fiji
India
Indonesia
Kiribati
Lao P.D.R.
Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nauru
Nepal
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vietnam
Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Hungary
Kosovo
FYR Macedonia
Montenegro
Poland
Romania
Serbia
Turkey

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Projections
2018

2022

2.5
3.8
–1.8
–16.5
23.0
–12.5
–10.5
–3.6
0.9
–8.2
–3.6
–16.6
–1.4
2.6
3.4
2.4
–6.3
32.3
–9.9
4.7
–4.0
–2.8
1.8
–13.3
–17.0
15.0
–9.6
–10.3
–19.0
–6.0
–1.2
63.8
4.2
–9.9
–8.3
5.0
–4.9
–21.9
–0.4
7.9
40.4
–19.7
6.9
–7.9
–6.5
–3.4
–15.9
–6.4
–8.3
–5.1
–0.8
–9.2
–6.8
–27.9
–4.1
–4.8
–6.2
–1.8

3.2
4.1
0.2
–13.6
28.0
–14.5
–10.3
0.9
–2.2
–7.5
–9.6
–12.9
–2.2
6.6
2.4
0.4
–22.2
36.6
–9.3
3.9
–4.3
–2.8
0.7
–2.2
–15.6
10.1
–7.3
–20.9
–15.4
–13.0
–1.1
46.3
–2.4
–9.0
–20.4
3.6
–7.0
–32.9
–1.9
3.4
42.0
–19.0
–42.2
–5.4
–3.8
–5.0
–11.3
–6.1
–1.7
–1.1
0.3
–11.6
–2.0
–22.7
–5.4
–5.1
–6.4
–5.8

4.0
4.7
1.7
–10.4
26.5
–8.2
–12.8
5.3
–2.9
–11.7
–7.3
–0.8
–6.3
5.8
0.9
–1.0
–29.8
34.7
–5.9
1.8
–5.1
–4.2
0.2
–13.5
–14.3
10.9
–14.8
2.0
–18.8
–26.5
–1.8
26.1
–1.0
–11.8
–24.0
2.5
–4.3
–8.3
–7.1
2.5
41.4
–16.8
–63.6
–8.1
0.2
–6.3
–13.2
–9.5
0.3
–0.7
0.7
–12.7
–2.5
–17.6
–5.2
–4.9
–8.6
–8.9

2.4
3.2
–0.6
–10.0
21.9
–2.8
–11.7
0.5
3.7
–7.5
–9.2
–0.9
–8.1
1.2
1.0
0.7
–21.5
29.8
–8.2
2.5
–1.4
–4.8
–2.7
–4.5
–24.9
5.2
–6.6
0.1
–13.4
–27.4
–4.0
38.1
4.8
–11.2
–36.1
2.8
–6.3
1.7
–5.8
–0.4
41.0
–12.3
–36.4
–6.5
6.0
–4.4
–10.1
–8.7
–0.9
0.0
1.8
–5.8
–3.2
–18.5
–3.7
–4.8
–11.5
–5.5

0.6
1.5
–2.3
–7.3
16.1
–10.0
–5.8
0.5
–13.3
–5.2
–7.8
–7.3
–9.2
2.9
0.7
1.2
–25.4
20.9
–13.0
1.5
–9.7
–1.7
–3.2
8.4
–26.7
3.5
–4.3
–5.3
–10.1
–25.4
–4.9
18.8
3.3
–11.6
–31.3
4.2
–0.4
–3.4
–3.4
–1.2
42.3
–8.3
–22.3
–3.3
4.5
–3.6
–9.3
–5.3
1.3
1.0
3.8
–3.6
–1.6
–14.5
–1.3
–1.1
–6.1
–6.7

2.1
2.8
–0.1
–7.6
13.3
–6.6
–10.7
2.8
–16.0
–5.3
–2.8
–6.4
–3.9
1.7
1.5
1.2
–26.4
30.7
–9.8
2.2
–7.6
–1.3
–3.1
25.1
–18.3
4.4
–3.2
1.9
1.2
–11.5
–3.3
–13.5
4.5
–15.0
2.9
3.8
–8.1
–4.3
–2.5
3.7
27.0
–10.7
–23.1
–0.3
4.9
–2.9
–10.8
–7.4
0.1
2.1
2.1
–7.0
–0.5
–15.2
–2.1
–0.7
–6.0
–4.7

2.8
5.0
–3.0
–2.6
–0.4
–3.3
–12.0
–2.8
–16.0
–5.0
–6.0
–14.0
–0.3
0.7
2.0
1.6
–28.3
16.0
–9.3
2.7
–1.5
–1.1
–2.0
35.2
–16.5
3.0
–7.3
16.5
4.2
–4.0
–5.2
–9.5
5.0
–7.7
19.8
2.5
–3.0
–3.0
–2.4
8.1
7.7
–14.7
–27.0
–10.5
–0.1
–2.0
–8.6
–5.5
–0.1
4.8
3.4
–8.5
–2.1
–13.3
–0.6
–1.2
–4.7
–3.7

0.0
2.0
–5.6
–2.3
–3.6
–3.6
–13.3
–6.4
–9.7
–3.8
–3.8
–21.0
–4.1
0.7
1.4
0.6
–29.1
9.6
–8.8
1.7
–5.1
–0.7
–1.8
15.4
–10.6
2.4
–19.6
8.5
3.2
–6.3
–5.9
1.7
6.3
–10.3
20.1
0.2
–6.1
–3.9
–2.4
11.5
–19.3
–12.8
–34.0
–3.7
4.1
–1.8
–7.6
–4.5
4.2
2.6
5.5
–9.8
–3.1
–19.0
–0.2
–2.3
–4.0
–3.8

0.9
2.8
–4.6
–3.6
1.9
–5.3
–11.9
–5.3
–11.6
–4.0
–6.3
–15.4
–3.3
0.9
0.9
–0.7
–29.4
4.8
–8.6
1.4
–5.0
–1.4
–1.7
–4.6
–9.6
2.4
–17.2
5.9
3.4
–4.9
–6.6
0.7
–0.4
–12.1
18.6
–0.1
–5.7
–5.0
–2.5
10.1
–5.6
–13.5
–37.7
–14.4
1.3
–2.4
–9.2
–4.3
2.5
3.8
4.8
–11.0
–2.3
–20.2
–1.0
–3.0
–4.0
–4.6

1.3
3.2
–4.0
–3.2
2.5
–4.6
–10.7
–3.8
–12.0
–4.0
–6.2
–14.3
–3.0
0.3
0.7
–1.3
–16.6
–2.1
–8.6
1.2
–4.7
–1.5
–1.8
–5.9
–10.9
2.2
–17.0
4.5
3.0
–8.7
–6.6
–1.3
–0.7
–14.4
17.3
–0.3
–5.0
–5.0
–2.3
8.1
–15.9
–13.6
–39.0
–13.6
1.4
–2.5
–8.2
–4.2
1.9
3.0
4.2
–11.3
–2.5
–21.2
–1.2
–2.9
–3.9
–4.6

2.2
4.0
–2.2
–5.1
5.4
–2.5
–9.1
0.5
–9.7
–5.4
–4.3
–11.9
–3.0
–2.0
–0.4
–2.4
10.0
14.1
–8.0
0.2
–3.3
–2.4
–1.9
–2.9
–4.8
1.8
–10.3
–0.7
2.9
–4.1
–6.4
2.1
–1.9
–12.3
16.5
–1.0
–4.0
–6.0
–2.0
2.9
–17.0
–11.4
–27.8
–4.7
0.0
–2.8
–6.2
–4.9
–0.4
0.5
1.4
–10.0
–3.1
–14.0
–2.2
–2.9
–3.7
–3.8

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

261

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account (continued)
(Percent of GDP)

Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan
Afghanistan
Algeria
Bahrain
Djibouti
Egypt
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya 3
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Sudan4
Syria5
Tunisia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen

262

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Projections
2018

2022

–0.9
–13.8
2.2
–10.3
–6.6
–4.9
4.3
–1.6
1.9
–2.0
–1.8
–22.7
–4.8
0.5
–1.5
–24.3
0.7
–9.1
–1.9
–3.8
–11.0
–1.0
–8.5
–0.8
3.0
–0.5
–25.2
–10.8
–29.2
2.9
8.6
–1.2
0.2

–1.9
–14.5
–0.4
–10.1
–5.7
–2.5
3.9
–3.4
1.4
–3.0
–3.2
–15.9
–7.5
–2.3
–2.5
–23.7
–1.4
–9.6
–1.5
–4.3
–8.0
–0.5
–8.9
–10.8
–0.3
–2.4
–20.4
–14.7
–30.6
14.9
18.8
–1.8
1.9

–2.0
–10.3
–1.0
–14.1
–12.6
–1.1
0.3
–2.9
–1.7
–2.9
–5.3
–14.1
–7.5
–0.5
–4.8
–23.6
–3.4
–13.0
–4.3
–8.0
–12.2
–1.1
–11.9
–13.2
0.4
–1.9
–13.0
–16.9
–29.4
9.8
16.8
–2.7
4.9

–2.3
–14.8
–0.4
–17.1
–9.0
–1.2
7.2
–3.0
–4.0
–3.1
–5.1
–17.3
–6.4
–0.2
–5.4
–21.1
–2.6
–11.6
–5.7
–8.6
–11.1
–1.3
–10.7
–10.5
–2.0
–2.7
–7.6
–12.2
–27.6
3.3
13.1
–5.1
0.8

–2.8
–15.1
–2.1
–16.9
–8.9
–4.6
2.4
–3.0
–4.1
–3.3
–4.8
–9.8
–4.1
–1.0
–6.5
–23.2
–2.5
–13.3
–6.6
–9.6
–9.2
–2.5
–10.9
–9.8
1.7
–4.4
–11.1
–9.8
–30.9
–3.8
20.5
–5.0
2.0

–3.1
2.0
–1.5
–21.9
–9.9
–7.5
1.7
–4.2
–1.7
–5.2
–4.9
–7.2
–3.3
–0.5
–4.8
–4.4
–2.1
–9.6
–8.5
–7.0
–7.5
–1.8
–7.1
–13.7
–0.4
–4.4
–4.9
3.3
–25.7
–7.9
15.1
–4.5
2.3

–3.4
6.8
–2.7
–13.6
–6.5
–9.9
–5.7
–3.3
–1.9
–6.4
–4.3
–1.9
–2.0
–2.1
–3.6
–3.8
–0.3
–5.7
–3.1
–5.5
–3.2
–2.5
–9.0
–7.3
–1.1
–4.8
–9.7
6.8
–14.9
–16.4
3.9
–2.1
–6.6

–2.0
0.2
–2.7
–12.9
–4.6
–9.4
–5.7
–1.3
–1.4
–4.3
–3.2
0.8
–1.5
1.4
–2.0
–3.2
1.0
0.4
–0.9
–3.8
–2.2
–2.2
–8.6
–5.7
1.7
–2.7
–11.4
–1.9
–15.8
–2.8
–11.3
–0.1
–1.6

–2.0
1.4
–3.6
–17.8
–3.3
–8.0
–4.7
–1.4
–2.3
–3.8
–3.9
–6.2
–1.6
–0.7
–1.0
–7.1
0.5
–2.0
–1.1
–4.0
–2.7
–1.7
–8.4
–5.1
1.1
–1.5
–12.8
–0.5
–14.7
9.4
–9.0
–0.4
–0.4

–2.3
–0.8
–3.7
–14.0
–3.0
–6.6
–4.8
–1.8
–2.8
–3.6
–4.0
–7.3
–2.6
–1.6
–2.1
–6.3
–0.2
–1.1
–0.9
–4.2
–3.0
–2.0
–8.4
–3.3
0.4
–1.6
–11.1
–3.6
–13.6
6.1
–8.4
–0.8
–1.3

–2.6
–0.1
–4.3
–7.1
–2.7
–4.9
–4.4
–2.0
–3.5
–2.9
–4.1
0.2
–3.6
–1.6
–4.4
–5.0
–2.5
3.6
0.3
–4.4
–3.0
–2.2
–10.2
–2.8
0.5
–2.3
–10.9
–0.2
–11.3
1.1
–7.0
–1.5
–1.6

1.5
41.5
0.3
2.4
–6.6
–3.8
2.2
–11.5
–5.2
26.7
–11.9
18.5
–13.4
–5.4
–1.0
–5.5
6.5
4.9
...
–9.6
–2.9
–2.8
3.1
–10.1

6.2
29.2
7.5
3.0
2.8
–1.9
4.4
1.6
–7.1
31.8
–20.3
21.1
–8.2
–4.4
8.3
–2.2
19.1
12.7
...
–2.1
–2.8
–4.8
4.2
–3.4

12.8
26.7
9.9
8.8
–13.1
–2.5
10.4
10.9
–10.3
42.9
–15.4
9.9
–5.0
–7.6
13.0
0.1
31.1
23.6
...
–0.4
...
–7.4
12.6
–3.0

12.4
10.8
5.9
8.4
–18.8
–3.6
6.0
5.1
–15.2
45.5
–24.0
29.9
–24.1
–9.3
10.1
–2.1
33.2
22.4
...
–9.3
...
–8.3
19.7
–1.7

9.7
0.3
0.4
7.4
–23.3
–2.2
6.7
1.1
–10.4
39.9
–26.7
0.0
–22.0
–7.6
6.6
–1.1
30.4
18.1
–4.8
–8.7
...
–8.4
19.0
–3.1

5.5
5.7
–4.4
4.6
–25.1
–0.8
3.2
2.6
–7.3
33.4
–26.4
–78.4
–27.3
–5.9
5.8
–1.3
24.0
9.8
–6.3
–7.1
...
–9.1
13.3
–1.7

–3.7
3.0
–16.5
–2.4
–31.8
–3.6
2.4
–6.5
–9.1
3.5
–18.7
–52.6
–19.7
–2.1
–15.5
–1.0
8.4
–8.7
–7.2
–8.0
...
–8.9
4.7
–5.5

–4.1
7.1
–16.5
–4.7
–30.4
–6.0
4.1
–8.7
–9.3
–4.5
–18.6
–22.4
–14.9
–4.4
–18.6
–1.7
–4.9
–4.3
–10.1
–5.6
...
–9.0
2.4
–5.6

–1.9
4.7
–13.0
–4.6
–21.0
–5.9
5.1
–6.3
–8.4
–0.6
–18.0
1.8
–14.2
–4.0
–14.3
–4.0
2.3
0.6
–11.1
–1.9
...
–8.7
2.1
–2.3

–1.6
1.6
–10.8
–4.2
–18.2
–3.8
5.9
–6.7
–8.3
–1.4
–16.8
9.8
–9.6
–2.9
–13.2
–4.9
1.0
0.4
–10.7
–2.0
...
–8.4
2.1
–2.4

–0.1
–3.8
–6.7
–3.1
–17.3
–2.2
6.2
–0.6
–6.2
–1.0
–15.6
–0.5
–7.9
–1.0
–6.1
–3.0
1.0
1.6
–10.0
–1.5
...
–6.2
3.7
–3.2

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account (continued)
(Percent of GDP)

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
South Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe 6

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Projections
2018

–2.4
–10.0
–8.3
–6.3
–4.7
1.7
–14.6
–3.5
–9.1
–8.2
–6.9
–6.1
–14.1
6.6
–9.7
–7.6
–6.7
4.4
–12.5
–5.5
–5.7
–5.8
–4.4
1.5
–23.2
–21.1
–10.2
–10.8
–7.4
–10.9
–1.5
–24.4
4.7
–7.0
–24.7
–6.7
–14.8
–13.3
–2.7
...
–11.2
–7.6
–5.6
–5.7
6.0
–13.7

–0.8
9.1
–8.2
–2.6
–2.2
–12.2
–12.4
–2.8
–10.2
–8.5
–0.2
–10.5
7.8
1.9
–20.2
–5.6
–1.4
14.9
–0.7
–8.6
–6.4
–8.3
–5.9
–8.4
–32.0
–9.7
–8.6
–10.7
–10.3
–16.1
–3.5
–19.8
3.6
–7.2
–22.9
–4.4
–19.4
–22.7
–1.5
...
–8.6
–7.7
–6.3
–8.0
7.5
–12.5

–0.8
12.6
–7.3
3.1
–1.5
–14.4
–16.3
–3.0
–7.6
–5.8
–4.9
–5.2
–3.2
10.4
–5.7
0.6
–2.5
21.0
–12.3
–9.0
–18.4
–1.3
–9.2
–12.9
–27.4
–6.9
–8.6
–5.1
–13.8
–25.3
–3.0
–22.3
2.6
–7.4
–27.7
–8.0
–23.0
–65.0
–2.2
18.2
–6.9
–10.8
–8.0
–10.0
4.7
–20.1

–1.8
12.0
–7.4
0.3
–7.0
–18.6
–12.6
–3.6
–4.6
–7.8
–7.3
–4.6
17.7
–1.2
–1.1
2.3
–6.9
17.6
–7.9
–11.7
–20.0
–8.4
–8.4
–8.2
–21.5
–6.9
–9.3
–2.2
–7.3
–44.7
–5.7
–14.7
3.8
–11.2
–21.9
–10.9
–21.1
–31.8
–5.1
–15.9
3.3
–11.6
–7.5
–6.8
5.4
–12.9

–2.4
6.7
–7.4
8.9
–11.3
–19.3
–4.9
–3.9
–3.0
–9.1
–8.3
–5.2
1.7
–1.4
–2.5
–0.1
–5.9
7.0
–10.2
–11.9
–12.5
–5.0
–8.8
–5.5
–30.1
–5.9
–8.4
–2.9
–6.3
–42.9
–4.0
–15.0
3.7
–8.7
–13.8
–10.5
–11.9
–17.5
–5.9
–3.9
5.3
–10.6
–13.2
–7.0
–0.6
–15.6

–3.9
–3.0
–8.6
15.4
–8.0
–18.5
–9.1
–4.3
–5.6
–8.9
–8.0
–4.8
–11.6
1.4
–4.3
0.6
–6.4
7.3
–10.8
–9.5
–13.4
0.6
–10.4
–5.2
–26.9
–0.3
–8.4
–4.7
–5.7
–38.2
–10.8
–15.4
0.2
–11.8
–21.9
–9.0
–23.1
–18.2
–5.3
–1.6
3.4
–10.1
–9.9
–8.5
2.1
–15.1

–6.1
–10.0
–8.4
7.8
–8.0
–17.7
–5.0
–4.1
–9.0
–12.3
0.4
–3.9
–42.9
–0.6
–17.7
–2.2
–11.6
–5.7
–15.0
–7.7
–15.4
2.0
–6.8
–4.8
–35.2
–1.9
–9.5
–5.3
–4.9
–40.3
–12.6
–18.0
–3.2
–13.4
–13.0
–7.5
–18.6
–17.4
–4.4
–7.2
10.8
–8.5
–11.1
–7.1
–3.9
–9.3

–4.2
–5.1
–7.2
11.7
–6.8
–13.1
–3.7
–3.6
–9.1
–9.2
–10.1
–3.4
–70.1
–1.1
–10.5
–0.1
–9.9
–10.2
–8.9
–6.7
–31.9
0.9
–5.2
–7.7
–24.7
0.8
–13.5
–7.1
–4.4
–38.2
–14.0
–15.5
0.7
–14.4
–6.2
–5.3
–18.4
–19.7
–3.3
4.7
0.7
–5.6
–9.7
–4.3
–4.4
–4.1

–3.4
–4.8
–8.7
4.5
–7.2
–12.4
–6.1
–3.6
–9.7
–2.0
–9.5
–4.6
–15.9
–2.9
–8.0
0.7
–8.3
–9.3
–9.4
–5.8
–25.0
0.1
–6.1
–8.5
–26.7
–4.7
–9.1
–7.0
–5.8
–25.6
–7.3
–18.6
1.9
–10.2
–10.2
–5.1
–15.6
–21.1
–2.9
1.7
–1.1
–5.6
–8.3
–5.6
–3.6
–3.6

–3.6
–4.5
–7.1
2.8
–7.1
–11.8
–6.0
–3.5
–6.5
–2.8
–11.3
–2.1
2.5
–2.8
–7.4
0.3
–7.4
–6.7
–12.0
–5.4
–21.4
–0.6
–7.0
–9.4
–31.3
–5.3
–8.1
–5.6
–6.2
–45.8
–6.6
–18.3
1.0
–11.2
–9.9
–5.2
–14.6
–18.5
–3.3
–12.7
0.2
–6.5
–7.3
–7.2
–2.8
–0.8

2022
–4.1
–4.1
–6.2
3.9
–6.7
–9.5
–5.4
–1.7
–5.1
–3.1
–13.1
–2.0
–5.0
–2.5
–4.7
–1.2
–6.4
1.5
–12.0
–4.3
–11.8
–1.2
–7.3
–13.2
–22.4
–4.0
–7.4
–5.7
–0.3
–114.1
–6.0
–14.1
0.7
–8.0
–7.8
–5.7
–14.4
–15.1
–3.8
–4.5
1.3
–6.7
–4.3
–3.6
–0.4
–1.9

1Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic
structure.
2Starting in 2014 data exclude Crimea and Sevastopol.
3See country-specific notes for Libya in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
5Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
6The Zimbabwe dollar ceased circulating in early 2009. Data are based on IMF staff estimates of price and exchange rate developments in US dollars. IMF staff estimates of US dollar
values may differ from authorities’ estimates.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

263

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances
(Billions of US dollars)

Advanced Economies
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
United States
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Euro Area
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Germany
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
France
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Italy
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

264

Projections
2017
2018

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

12.8
303.6
–376.4
–94.1
–287.2
469.6

–96.7
341.0
–745.2
–118.2
63.9
352.9

–210.1
358.7
–900.7
0.7
–44.8
349.8

–122.3
112.4
–201.8
–92.2
–215.1
273.2

235.8
165.9
–360.8
33.5
245.1
153.1

380.5
167.3
–152.2
–34.5
263.9
134.9

440.8
74.4
–20.0
–24.2
183.5
226.6

470.5
–180.7
428.9
67.5
55.7
97.8

389.0
204.7
272.0
17.1
–235.9
128.9

367.2
152.7
179.6
26.4
–62.6
72.9

–239.4
151.5
18.5
–44.8
–416.9
52.3

–446.4
85.8
–620.8
–14.1
100.9
1.8

–525.6
173.1
–226.3
–35.0
–453.4
15.9

–448.9
126.9
–498.3
7.1
–89.0
4.5

–404.0
104.7
–30.7
2.2
–477.1
–3.1

–326.8
101.2
–120.8
–54.3
–249.4
–3.6

–333.2
–195.0
–53.6
–25.2
–53.0
–6.3

–377.7
–167.8
–196.7
15.8
–31.0
2.1

–460.6
–17.2
–319.6
–16.2
–107.4
–0.2

–528.7
–109.6
–421.5
–23.8
26.2
0.0

31.6
41.6
–347.0
15.7
262.9
58.4

–20.1
84.3
–66.8
–4.4
–46.9
13.7

–66.0
130.3
–349.6
5.5
133.5
14.3

179.3
58.2
–177.3
38.9
240.6
19.0

437.3
36.8
–169.6
42.1
521.8
6.2

336.2
81.3
43.7
60.8
144.6
5.8

332.4
263.1
135.5
100.3
–178.2
11.7

396.4
199.9
526.4
25.0
–372.0
17.1

...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...

184.4
43.0
119.2
–7.5
17.4
12.4

123.7
60.6
154.1
17.6
–110.7
2.1

167.7
10.3
–51.4
39.8
165.1
3.9

194.3
33.6
66.8
30.9
61.1
1.7

300.0
26.0
209.6
31.8
31.4
1.2

316.3
96.6
175.0
42.3
5.6
–3.3

259.6
59.9
217.9
29.2
–45.0
–2.4

260.5
23.8
230.4
36.1
–31.7
1.9

296.0
60.1
224.4
38.0
–26.5
0.0

304.3
53.8
251.0
38.5
–39.0
0.0

–30.7
70.3
–328.7
23.6
212.0
–5.5

–34.2
34.3
–155.0
–34.8
105.1
7.7

–74.6
19.8
–333.7
–19.4
240.3
–7.7

–48.0
19.4
–50.6
–18.4
–3.6
5.2

–19.2
–13.9
–79.3
–22.3
98.2
–1.9

–10.3
47.2
–23.8
–31.8
–2.9
1.0

–13.5
–2.6
51.5
12.0
–82.4
8.0

–22.7
1.4
40.7
15.1
–82.1
2.2

–26.9
5.6
29.6
19.3
–83.7
2.3

–19.3
10.1
31.1
24.3
–87.3
2.5

–51.8
–0.2
–53.1
–6.9
–0.4
8.8

–111.2
21.3
58.4
6.6
–198.9
1.4

–89.6
17.2
15.9
–10.1
–113.9
1.3

–13.1
6.8
–31.3
7.5
2.1
1.9

16.9
0.9
–17.5
4.0
27.5
2.0

58.2
3.1
–4.7
–4.8
65.9
–1.3

30.4
3.0
99.3
3.7
–76.2
0.6

70.7
–6.2
170.3
3.5
–95.7
–1.3

50.9
3.1
42.9
3.4
1.4
0.0

47.5
10.6
40.7
2.5
–6.3
0.0

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)

Spain
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Japan
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
United Kingdom
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Canada
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Other Advanced Economies 1
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Emerging Market and Developing
Economies
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Projections
2017
2018

–72.8
2.7
–69.6
8.4
–20.4
6.0

–58.9
–1.9
–46.6
–11.4
0.0
1.1

–43.4
12.8
43.1
2.9
–116.2
13.9

0.5
–27.2
53.7
–10.7
–18.2
2.8

41.6
–24.6
–83.6
1.4
147.8
0.7

14.0
10.7
–13.5
0.2
11.6
5.1

24.8
32.6
11.2
–1.4
–23.3
5.6

29.6
23.5
52.3
–3.2
–52.1
9.1

29.9
24.1
–17.2
0.0
23.0
0.0

34.4
25.3
–15.7
0.0
24.8
0.0

168.8
61.2
211.7
–10.5
–120.9
27.2

247.3
72.5
147.9
–11.9
–5.5
44.3

158.4
117.8
–162.9
–17.1
43.4
177.3

53.9
117.5
28.8
6.7
–61.1
–37.9

–4.3
144.7
–280.6
58.1
34.8
38.7

58.9
118.6
–42.2
34.0
–60.1
8.5

178.6
131.0
131.5
17.7
–106.7
5.1

266.7
134.6
282.2
–16.7
–127.7
–5.7

171.6
121.7
198.0
–8.2
–149.9
10.0

187.7
126.0
191.0
–8.5
–131.2
10.5

–45.4
–61.0
–48.5
–45.5
100.6
9.0

–46.8
–10.1
21.3
–39.4
–28.0
9.4

–37.6
53.4
11.4
4.8
–115.1
7.9

–83.7
–34.9
338.3
–58.6
–340.6
12.1

–122.9
–11.2
–86.8
18.1
–50.7
7.8

–129.5
–193.4
–204.4
–1.0
257.5
11.7

–102.7
–115.2
–415.8
–48.6
444.7
32.2

–147.3
–267.5
–256.1
35.9
331.5
8.8

–92.9
5.1
0.0
–8.0
–102.1
12.1

–88.4
0.0
0.0
–0.2
–100.9
12.6

–41.6
16.9
–91.0
...
22.3
10.2

–58.3
6.3
–109.9
...
41.4
3.9

–49.4
12.5
–104.3
...
34.3
8.1

–62.7
12.8
–63.8
...
–13.4
1.7

–56.9
–12.0
–27.1
...
–22.5
4.7

–43.5
1.4
–26.2
...
–24.0
5.3

–53.4
25.5
–35.8
...
–51.6
8.5

–47.8
35.3
–114.6
...
25.9
5.6

–55.6
10.5
–47.3
...
–18.7
0.0

–51.2
11.5
–53.3
...
–9.3
0.0

149.9
21.9
–108.0
17.7
–114.0
332.5

286.5
93.9
–51.4
–17.9
–17.3
279.3

287.5
–6.7
38.9
41.1
89.3
125.1

248.5
–35.1
138.8
–28.8
–101.8
274.7

372.4
25.5
130.9
–28.7
144.2
101.3

368.8
–9.8
185.4
–21.9
108.1
106.3

371.2
–85.5
318.3
–17.4
–21.7
175.9

345.1
–55.4
246.4
–0.2
83.7
69.7

364.0
–91.8
235.9
–14.5
128.7
103.5

357.0
–82.5
239.1
–14.0
170.1
46.1

66.4
–326.4
–85.9
...
–44.3
524.4

135.7
–452.7
–224.4
...
–23.8
835.6

240.4
–531.6
–149.9
...
169.2
748.0

118.7
–484.3
–241.0
...
411.7
431.0

24.1
–482.8
–160.1
...
79.8
589.5

18.9
–412.0
–115.4
...
409.4
128.4

–266.9
–341.0
112.3
...
472.5
–515.8

–419.9
–272.6
–10.0
...
353.0
–479.6

–128.6
–217.5
–71.0
...
283.6
–112.0

–137.5
–189.8
–19.0
...
44.3
39.1

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

265

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)

Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Emerging and Developing Asia
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Emerging and Developing Europe
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Latin America and the Caribbean
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Middle East, North Africa,
Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Sub-Saharan Africa
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

266

Projections
2017
2018

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

28.7
–15.5
–6.1
...
36.4
10.6

75.5
–8.5
–14.2
...
36.0
60.5

100.7
–15.2
17.9
...
64.3
31.9

50.1
–27.6
3.5
...
42.6
30.1

–8.4
–3.7
–0.2
...
17.6
–22.5

12.0
19.2
28.8
...
72.8
–114.1

54.2
0.5
12.0
...
41.3
–6.9

0.6
–36.0
–2.1
...
28.0
10.2

22.2
–9.6
–5.8
...
12.4
24.8

30.1
–4.0
–1.9
...
6.2
29.5

214.2
–114.6
–67.0
...
–63.2
461.6

148.4
–225.0
–91.3
0.2
–97.5
563.0

65.2
–277.3
–58.0
–0.3
–28.7
431.3

9.7
–221.9
–115.6
1.5
207.1
139.4

32.9
–273.2
–64.7
–2.0
–78.4
450.7

147.6
–205.2
–123.9
0.4
281.0
195.1

86.7
–141.1
82.7
–1.5
462.5
–316.1

–26.0
–21.9
41.5
–10.2
345.0
–380.3

161.7
7.5
27.1
–10.8
234.3
–95.9

131.8
44.3
41.7
–11.3
54.6
2.9

–51.4
–30.6
–10.1
0.9
–42.5
31.0

–89.1
–26.7
–45.8
0.0
–52.5
35.9

–107.1
–39.8
–53.5
1.6
–30.1
14.6

–65.4
–27.5
–70.0
–2.9
7.3
27.8

–61.7
–25.8
–40.0
–1.4
–13.0
18.5

–42.5
–32.5
–19.3
0.3
9.2
–0.2

–8.8
–34.0
24.7
–1.7
12.6
–10.4

–13.0
–28.0
–5.0
0.1
–3.6
23.6

–39.9
–27.0
–34.0
0.0
9.4
11.7

–36.9
–32.2
–14.1
0.1
–4.6
14.0

–36.0
–73.5
–26.0
–2.5
11.6
54.4

–119.9
–112.3
–96.8
0.6
–2.0
90.7

–127.7
–148.0
–110.5
5.5
15.6
109.8

–148.9
–154.2
–87.6
2.3
31.6
59.0

–192.7
–150.2
–103.3
1.4
47.4
11.9

–201.8
–137.6
–110.0
4.4
2.3
39.2

–189.2
–133.6
–60.0
1.5
32.0
–29.2

–108.4
–140.2
–50.9
–1.3
64.0
19.9

–112.4
–127.6
–51.7
–0.5
54.5
12.8

–124.9
–129.5
–44.0
–0.4
34.0
15.0

–41.5
–63.6
31.7
...
16.1
–25.7

121.8
–48.9
24.1
...
60.5
86.1

319.2
–21.6
73.3
...
129.4
138.1

286.4
–25.6
57.1
...
100.3
154.7

308.0
–8.8
70.4
...
118.0
128.2

180.6
–28.8
131.0
...
62.0
16.0

–130.4
–2.5
67.8
...
–56.9
–139.2

–204.6
–9.5
20.1
...
–72.5
–143.1

–107.7
–20.8
9.3
...
–30.5
–66.0

–81.8
–22.4
7.7
...
–41.6
–25.9

–47.6
–28.5
–8.5
–0.2
–2.7
–7.6

–1.0
–31.2
–0.4
–0.2
31.6
–0.5

–9.9
–29.7
–19.2
–1.7
18.8
22.2

–13.2
–27.4
–28.4
–1.7
22.8
19.8

–54.0
–21.0
–22.3
–0.8
–11.8
2.7

–77.1
–27.0
–22.1
–1.5
–18.0
–7.7

–79.3
–30.3
–15.0
–0.4
–19.0
–14.0

–68.5
–37.0
–13.7
0.9
–7.9
–9.9

–52.5
–39.9
–15.9
0.0
3.5
0.6

–55.8
–46.0
–8.3
0.0
–4.3
3.6

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)

Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Nonfuel
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2012–16
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Memorandum
World
Financial Account Balance

Projections
2017
2018

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

17.3
–53.7
11.0
...
104.9
–48.1

257.2
–25.6
20.3
...
146.5
114.2

516.6
–21.1
87.0
...
254.5
194.9

453.6
–25.7
47.2
...
196.0
234.7

366.7
13.0
78.1
...
175.4
99.8

224.0
10.6
162.4
...
152.8
–107.1

–79.3
7.9
80.1
...
15.4
–190.0

–163.2
–26.1
19.0
...
4.7
–161.2

–43.8
–14.3
12.2
...
8.6
–50.7

–10.0
–8.7
15.7
...
–8.2
–9.0

51.5
–270.1
–97.1
...
–149.3
572.8

–119.9
–424.8
–244.7
0.5
–170.0
720.4

–276.2
–510.5
–236.9
5.8
–85.3
553.1

–335.0
–458.6
–288.1
–1.0
215.7
196.2

–342.7
–495.7
–238.2
–2.7
–95.6
489.7

–205.1
–422.6
–277.8
3.6
256.6
235.5

–187.6
–348.9
32.1
–2.0
457.2
–325.8

–256.7
–246.5
–29.0
–10.5
348.4
–318.4

–84.8
–203.2
–83.3
–11.3
275.0
–61.3

–127.6
–181.0
–34.7
–11.7
52.5
48.1

–187.7
–196.3
–61.4
...
–73.8
149.1

–287.9
–222.9
–212.2
...
–86.0
233.5

–392.2
–283.7
–182.8
...
–63.5
135.1

–427.8
–283.0
–202.3
...
–51.3
109.7

–430.5
–281.3
–179.2
...
–28.3
60.2

–375.8
–289.0
–198.4
...
–10.7
117.3

–282.7
–281.8
–40.3
...
38.4
2.8

–225.4
–297.2
–52.7
...
41.4
95.5

–235.8
–287.7
–103.6
...
70.3
97.1

–265.6
–311.6
–61.7
...
35.8
84.4

–19.9
–20.7
14.1
...
0.1
–13.1

–11.7
–21.6
–11.2
...
9.1
12.2

–25.2
–22.5
1.0
...
6.9
–10.2

–47.4
–25.8
–1.4
...
–0.7
–21.4

–49.5
–25.0
–10.1
...
–11.7
–2.1

–27.7
–18.2
–0.4
...
1.8
–10.5

–39.4
–25.4
1.7
...
–20.9
5.4

–50.3
–25.5
–0.9
...
–21.9
–1.5

–31.1
–23.2
–14.1
...
4.3
2.2

–28.6
–26.5
–7.2
...
–6.7
12.3

79.1

38.9

30.3

–3.7

259.9

399.4

174.0

50.6

260.4

229.7

Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar
values for the relevant individual countries. Some group aggregates for the financial derivatives are not shown because of incomplete data. Projections for the euro area are not available because
of data constraints.
1Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic
structure.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

267

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing
(Percent of GDP)
Averages
1999–2008 2003–10
Advanced Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
United States
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Euro Area
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Germany
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
France
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Italy
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Spain
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Japan
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
United Kingdom
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

268

Projections
2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Average
2019–22

–0.8
–0.8
22.4
23.0
0.0

–0.7
–0.7
21.5
22.2
0.0

0.0
–0.1
21.0
21.1
0.1

0.1
0.1
21.4
21.0
0.0

0.5
0.5
21.6
20.9
0.0

0.5
0.5
22.2
21.2
0.0

0.6
0.7
22.5
21.2
–0.1

0.7
0.8
22.0
20.9
0.0

0.8
0.8
22.0
21.1
0.0

0.7
0.7
22.0
21.3
0.0

0.7
0.7
22.3
21.6
0.0

–4.5
–4.5
18.3
22.4
0.0

–4.5
–4.5
16.7
21.2
0.0

–2.9
–2.9
15.7
18.5
0.0

–2.6
–2.6
17.7
19.4
0.0

–2.1
–2.1
18.3
19.8
0.0

–2.1
–2.1
19.3
20.1
0.0

–2.4
–2.4
19.4
20.4
0.0

–2.4
–2.4
18.0
19.7
0.0

–2.4
–2.4
17.5
19.8
0.0

–2.6
–2.6
17.4
20.0
0.0

–2.6
–2.6
17.7
20.3
0.0

–0.1
–0.2
23.1
22.8
0.1

0.1
–0.1
22.6
22.3
0.1

0.1
0.0
22.4
21.5
0.1

1.5
1.4
22.3
20.1
0.1

2.4
2.2
22.4
19.6
0.2

2.6
2.5
22.9
19.9
0.1

3.1
3.2
23.7
20.0
–0.1

3.4
3.5
23.8
20.3
0.0

...
3.1
24.2
20.6
...

...
3.0
24.3
20.8
...

...
2.8
24.6
21.3
...

2.7
2.7
23.5
20.9
0.0

5.0
5.0
24.6
19.6
0.0

6.1
6.1
27.2
21.1
0.0

7.0
7.0
26.3
19.3
0.0

6.7
6.7
26.2
19.5
0.0

7.5
7.4
27.0
19.5
0.1

8.5
8.5
27.7
19.1
0.0

8.4
8.3
27.5
19.2
0.0

8.1
8.1
27.6
19.4
0.0

7.7
7.7
27.3
19.6
0.0

7.1
7.1
27.2
20.1
0.0

1.5
1.5
23.8
22.4
0.0

0.2
0.1
22.6
22.5
0.0

–0.9
–1.0
22.2
23.2
0.1

–1.2
–1.2
21.4
22.6
0.0

–0.8
–0.9
21.4
22.3
0.1

–1.2
–1.3
21.5
22.7
0.1

–0.4
–0.4
22.3
22.8
0.1

–0.9
–1.0
22.0
23.0
0.1

–1.0
–1.1
22.1
23.3
0.1

–0.7
–0.8
22.3
23.0
0.1

–0.1
–0.2
22.9
23.0
0.1

–0.5
–0.6
20.6
21.2
0.1

–1.5
–1.6
19.5
21.1
0.1

–2.9
–3.0
17.5
20.5
0.1

–0.1
–0.4
17.5
17.9
0.2

0.9
1.0
17.9
17.0
0.0

2.1
1.9
18.9
17.0
0.2

1.6
1.4
18.8
17.3
0.2

2.4
2.6
19.6
17.0
–0.1

2.6
2.7
19.6
16.9
–0.1

2.3
2.3
19.6
17.3
0.0

1.5
1.4
19.3
17.9
0.1

–5.3
–6.1
22.3
28.4
0.7

–6.0
–6.6
21.7
28.4
0.6

–2.8
–3.2
18.7
21.9
0.4

0.3
–0.2
19.8
20.0
0.5

2.2
1.5
20.2
18.7
0.6

1.6
1.1
20.5
19.4
0.5

2.0
1.4
21.4
20.1
0.7

2.1
1.9
22.3
20.4
0.2

2.3
1.9
22.5
20.6
0.4

2.4
2.0
22.8
20.8
0.4

2.4
2.0
22.8
20.9
0.4

3.0
3.2
28.5
25.3
–0.1

3.5
3.6
27.3
23.7
–0.1

2.1
2.1
24.2
22.1
0.0

0.9
1.0
23.6
22.7
0.0

0.7
0.9
24.1
23.2
–0.1

0.7
0.8
24.6
23.9
0.0

3.0
3.1
27.0
23.9
–0.1

3.7
3.8
27.2
23.3
–0.1

3.5
3.6
27.0
23.4
–0.1

3.7
3.8
27.3
23.5
–0.1

3.7
3.7
27.6
23.9
–0.1

–2.2
–2.1
15.9
18.1
0.0

–2.3
–2.3
14.9
17.2
0.0

–1.8
–1.8
14.1
15.8
0.0

–3.7
–3.7
12.4
16.0
0.0

–4.4
–4.4
12.0
16.4
0.0

–4.7
–4.7
12.7
17.3
0.0

–4.3
–4.3
13.0
17.2
–0.1

–4.5
–4.4
12.6
17.0
–0.1

–3.6
–3.6
13.4
17.0
–0.1

–3.3
–3.3
13.6
16.8
–0.1

–2.8
–2.7
14.6
17.3
–0.1

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Averages
1999–2008 2003–10
Canada
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Other Advanced Economies1
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Emerging Market and Developing
Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Emerging and Developing Asia
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Emerging and Developing Europe
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Latin America and the Caribbean
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Sub-Saharan Africa
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

Projections
2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Average
2019–22

1.4
1.4
23.1
21.7
0.0

0.1
0.1
22.9
22.7
0.0

–2.5
–2.8
21.4
24.2
0.3

–3.6
–3.6
21.3
24.9
0.0

–3.2
–3.2
21.7
24.9
0.0

–2.4
–2.4
22.2
24.7
0.0

–3.4
–3.4
20.4
23.8
0.0

–3.3
–3.3
19.6
22.9
0.0

–3.4
–3.4
19.9
23.3
0.0

–2.9
–2.9
20.5
23.4
0.0

–2.3
–2.3
21.2
23.5
0.0

3.7
3.8
29.8
25.8
–0.1

4.1
4.2
30.2
25.8
0.0

4.2
4.1
30.7
26.2
0.1

4.2
4.2
30.4
26.1
0.0

5.3
5.2
30.5
25.2
0.1

5.2
5.4
30.7
25.2
–0.1

5.7
5.9
31.1
24.9
–0.2

5.6
5.7
30.5
24.7
–0.1

5.2
5.4
30.7
25.3
–0.2

4.9
5.0
30.4
25.3
–0.1

4.7
4.8
30.0
25.2
–0.1

2.4
2.4
28.7
26.6
0.2

2.9
2.8
31.4
28.8
0.2

1.5
1.4
33.6
32.2
0.1

1.3
1.3
33.4
32.4
0.1

0.7
0.6
32.8
32.4
0.1

0.6
0.5
33.0
32.6
0.0

0.0
–0.2
32.7
33.0
0.1

–0.2
–0.3
32.0
32.3
0.1

–0.2
–0.3
31.7
32.0
0.1

–0.3
–0.4
31.5
31.9
0.1

–0.6
–0.7
31.4
32.0
0.1

6.6
7.0
27.7
20.9
–0.4

5.0
5.3
26.9
21.5
–0.3

4.1
4.0
28.6
24.5
0.0

2.2
2.4
27.4
25.0
–0.2

0.6
0.6
24.7
24.0
0.0

0.6
2.1
25.0
22.8
–1.5

2.8
2.8
26.3
23.2
0.0

0.0
0.0
26.0
25.5
0.0

0.9
0.9
25.6
24.3
0.0

1.3
1.3
26.5
24.9
0.0

2.0
2.0
26.2
23.8
0.0

3.5
3.4
37.0
34.0
0.1

4.1
4.0
41.5
37.7
0.1

0.9
0.9
43.9
42.9
0.1

1.0
1.0
43.7
42.6
0.1

0.8
0.7
43.0
42.3
0.1

1.6
1.5
43.6
42.1
0.0

2.0
2.0
42.6
40.6
0.0

1.4
1.4
41.1
39.7
0.0

1.0
0.9
40.5
39.6
0.0

0.7
0.7
39.8
39.2
0.0

0.1
0.0
38.5
38.5
0.0

–4.6
–4.9
19.6
24.2
0.3

–5.1
–5.5
19.6
25.1
0.4

–5.5
–6.3
20.4
26.6
0.8

–3.4
–4.4
20.5
24.9
0.9

–2.5
–3.6
21.5
25.0
1.1

–1.6
–2.9
22.1
24.9
1.3

–0.7
–2.0
22.9
24.7
1.3

–1.1
–1.8
22.6
24.2
0.6

–1.7
–2.4
22.5
24.8
0.7

–1.6
–2.5
22.6
25.0
0.9

–2.1
–2.7
22.7
25.3
0.6

–0.4
–0.5
19.9
20.5
0.1

0.2
0.1
20.9
21.0
0.1

–1.9
–2.0
20.3
22.2
0.0

–2.3
–2.3
19.8
22.3
0.0

–2.7
–2.8
19.0
22.3
0.1

–3.1
–3.1
18.0
21.8
0.0

–3.3
–3.4
18.6
22.5
0.0

–2.0
–2.0
17.7
20.0
0.0

–1.9
–2.0
17.7
19.7
0.0

–2.3
–2.3
17.5
19.8
0.0

–2.5
–2.5
18.3
20.8
0.0

8.0
8.3
34.3
26.4
0.2

8.8
9.3
36.4
27.8
0.2

12.8
12.8
39.5
26.7
0.0

11.9
12.4
37.9
25.9
0.0

9.9
9.7
36.1
26.0
0.0

6.2
5.5
32.9
26.8
0.1

–3.5
–3.7
24.8
28.1
0.0

–4.0
–4.1
23.7
27.2
–0.1

–1.8
–1.9
25.2
26.8
0.1

–1.6
–1.6
25.4
26.6
0.1

–0.5
–0.7
27.0
26.7
0.1

1.9
0.7
19.0
18.4
1.2

2.3
0.8
20.3
19.4
1.5

–0.3
–0.8
18.7
19.3
0.6

–0.6
–1.8
18.2
19.9
1.2

–1.8
–2.4
17.5
19.9
0.5

–3.4
–3.9
17.1
20.8
0.5

–5.6
–6.1
14.2
19.9
0.5

–3.7
–4.2
14.8
18.6
0.5

–3.0
–3.4
15.3
18.7
0.5

–3.2
–3.6
15.3
18.9
0.4

–3.6
–4.0
15.8
19.7
0.4

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

269

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Averages
1999–2008 2003–10
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Nonfuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2012–16
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Memorandum
World
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

Projections
2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Average
2019–22

9.3
9.7
33.6
24.4
0.0

9.7
10.0
33.9
24.4
0.0

10.5
10.5
35.8
25.2
0.0

9.3
9.7
34.5
25.3
–0.1

7.3
7.3
31.9
24.9
0.0

4.6
5.0
29.8
25.0
–0.7

–1.3
–1.4
26.0
27.6
–0.1

–1.8
–1.9
24.4
25.9
–0.1

0.3
0.2
25.4
24.7
0.1

0.3
0.4
25.4
24.4
0.1

1.3
1.2
26.2
24.1
0.1

0.6
0.4
27.4
27.2
0.2

1.0
0.8
30.7
30.0
0.2

–1.0
–1.2
33.0
34.0
0.2

–0.9
–1.1
33.2
34.2
0.2

–1.0
–1.2
33.0
34.2
0.2

–0.4
–0.6
33.8
34.3
0.2

0.2
0.1
34.0
34.0
0.2

0.1
0.0
33.3
33.4
0.1

–0.3
–0.4
32.9
33.3
0.1

–0.5
–0.6
32.6
33.2
0.1

–0.9
–1.0
32.2
33.3
0.1

–1.1
–1.4
21.7
23.3
0.3

–1.1
–1.5
23.1
24.7
0.3

–2.8
–3.0
23.4
26.3
0.2

–3.0
–3.3
22.8
26.1
0.3

–2.6
–2.9
22.4
25.2
0.3

–2.3
–2.6
22.5
25.1
0.3

–2.0
–2.4
22.5
24.8
0.3

–1.5
–1.6
22.6
24.2
0.2

–1.6
–1.8
22.5
24.3
0.2

–1.8
–2.0
22.6
24.6
0.2

–2.1
–2.2
23.1
25.4
0.2

–0.4
–0.9
20.7
22.1
0.5

–1.3
–1.9
20.8
22.7
0.6

–3.9
–4.5
16.4
20.5
0.5

–5.3
–6.0
14.8
20.5
0.7

–5.6
–6.0
13.3
19.3
0.4

–3.8
–4.3
14.0
18.2
0.5

–5.1
–5.6
12.2
17.8
0.4

–6.2
–6.4
12.2
18.5
0.1

–4.6
–4.9
13.9
19.0
0.3

–4.0
–4.3
15.4
19.9
0.3

–4.4
–4.7
16.8
21.7
0.2

0.0
0.0
24.0
23.9
0.1

0.3
0.2
24.3
24.1
0.1

0.6
0.5
25.6
25.1
0.1

0.6
0.5
26.0
25.3
0.1

0.6
0.5
26.0
25.3
0.1

0.6
0.5
26.4
25.6
0.0

0.4
0.4
26.5
25.8
0.0

0.4
0.4
25.8
25.3
0.0

0.4
0.4
25.8
25.4
0.0

0.3
0.3
25.8
25.5
0.0

0.1
0.1
26.1
26.0
0.0

Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US
dollar values for the relevant individual countries. This differs from the calculations in the April 2005 and earlier issues of the World Economic Outlook, in which the composites were
weighted by GDP valued at purchasing power parities as a share of total world GDP. The estimates of gross national savings and investment (or gross capital formation) are from individual
countries’ national accounts statistics. The estimates of the current account balance, the capital account balance, and the financial account balance (or net lending/net borrowing) are
from the balance of payments statistics. The link between domestic transactions and transactions with the rest of the world can be expressed as accounting identities. Savings (S  ) minus
investment (I   ) is equal to the current account balance (CAB  ) (S − I = CAB   ). Also, net lending/net borrowing (NLB  ) is the sum of the current account balance and the capital account
balance (KAB ) (NLB = CAB + KAB ). In practice, these identities do not hold exactly; imbalances result from imperfections in source data and compilation as well as from asymmetries in
group composition due to data availability.
1Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic
structure.

270

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
Projections
Averages
1999–2008
2009–18
World Real GDP
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Memorandum
Potential Output
Major Advanced Economies
World Trade, Volume1
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
World Prices in US Dollars
Manufactures
Oil
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Interest Rates
Real Six-Month LIBOR2
World Real Long-Term Interest Rate3
Current Account Balances
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Total External Debt
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Debt Service
Emerging Market and Developing Economies

2015

2016

2017

2018

Averages
2015–18 2019–22

4.2
2.5
6.2

3.4
1.4
5.0

Annual Percent Change
3.4
3.2
3.6
2.2
1.7
2.2
4.3
4.3
4.6

3.7
2.0
4.9

3.5
2.0
4.5

3.7
1.7
5.0

2.1
6.6

1.3
3.1

1.4
2.8

1.4
2.4

1.5
4.2

1.5
4.0

1.4
3.4

1.5
3.9

5.6
9.9

2.6
4.0

4.6
–0.9

2.7
2.0

4.0
4.4

3.8
4.9

3.8
2.6

3.5
5.0

5.6
8.8

2.8
3.8

3.8
1.8

2.2
2.5

3.8
4.8

3.6
4.5

3.4
3.4

3.4
4.4

–0.5
2.7

0.3
–0.6

1.9
–4.3

0.9
–1.2

–0.4
0.1

0.2
–0.5

0.6
–1.5

0.0
0.0

1.7
22.2
6.2

–0.1
–6.4
–0.7

–2.3
–47.2
–17.5

–5.2
–15.7
–1.8

1.5
17.4
7.1

1.0
–0.2
0.5

–1.3
–15.0
–3.4

1.2
1.4
–0.5

2.2
7.6

1.4
5.1

0.3
4.7

1.7
4.4

1.1
4.4

2.0
4.0

1.5
2.1

–0.7
0.8

–0.6
1.3

0.2
0.2

–0.3
0.5

1.1
0.5

–0.8
2.4

0.4
0.5

0.7
–0.2

0.8
1.7
4.3
4.2
Percent
–0.3
–0.3
0.4
–0.1
Percent of GDP
0.8
0.8
–0.3
–0.3

0.7
–0.4

0.8
–0.3

0.7
–0.7

32.3

28.0

28.5

29.7

29.5

28.8

29.1

27.6

9.4

9.9

12.3

10.7

10.2

9.7

10.7

9.5

1Data

refer to trade in goods and services.
interbank offered rate on US dollar deposits minus percent change in US GDP deflator.
3GDP-weighted average of 10-year (or nearest-maturity) government bond rates for Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the
United States.
2London

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

271

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER

1

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
SELECTED TOPICS

World Economic Outlook Archives
World Economic Outlook: Financial Systems and Economic Cycles

September 2006

World Economic Outlook: Spillovers and Cycles in the Global Economy

April 2007

World Economic Outlook: Globalization and Inequality

October 2007

World Economic Outlook: Housing and the Business Cycle

April 2008

World Economic Outlook: Financial Stress, Downturns, and Recoveries

October 2008

World Economic Outlook: Crisis and Recovery

April 2009

World Economic Outlook: Sustaining the Recovery

October 2009

World Economic Outlook: Rebalancing Growth

April 2010

World Economic Outlook: Recovery, Risk, and Rebalancing

October 2010

World Economic Outlook: Tensions from the Two-Speed Recovery—Unemployment, Commodities,
and Capital Flows

April 2011

World Economic Outlook: Slowing Growth, Rising Risks

September 2011

World Economic Outlook: Growth Resuming, Dangers Remain

April 2012

World Economic Outlook: Coping with High Debt and Sluggish Growth

October 2012

World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks

April 2013

World Economic Outlook: Transitions and Tensions

October 2013

World Economic Outlook: Recovery Strengthens, Remains Uneven

April 2014

World Economic Outlook: Legacies, Clouds, Uncertainties

October 2014

World Economic Outlook: Uneven Growth—Short- and Long-Term Factors

April 2015

World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices

October 2015

World Economic Outlook: Too Slow for Too Long

April 2016

World Economic Outlook: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

October 2016

World Economic Outlook: Gaining Momentum?

April 2017

World Economic Outlook: Seeking Sustainable Growth: Short-term Recovery, Long-term Challenges

October 2017

I. Methodology—Aggregation, Modeling, and Forecasting
Measuring Inequality: Conceptual, Methodological, and Measurement Issues

October 2007, Box 4.1

New Business Cycle Indices for Latin America: A Historical Reconstruction

October 2007, Box 5.3

Implications of New PPP Estimates for Measuring Global Growth

April 2008, Appendix 1.1

Measuring Output Gaps

October 2008, Box 1.3

Assessing and Communicating Risks to the Global Outlook

October 2008, Appendix 1.1

Fan Chart for Global Growth

April 2009, Appendix 1.2

Indicators for Tracking Growth

October 2010, Appendix 1.2

Inferring Potential Output from Noisy Data: The Global Projection Model View

October 2010, Box 1.3

Uncoordinated Rebalancing

October 2010, Box 1.4

World Economic Outlook Downside Scenarios

April 2011, Box 1.2

Fiscal Balance Sheets: The Significance of Nonfinancial Assets and Their Measurement

October 2014, Box 3.3

Tariff Scenarios

October 2016, Scenario box

World Growth Projections over the Medium Term

October 2016, Box 1.1

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

273

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH: SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

II. Historical Surveys
Historical Perspective on Growth and the Current Account

October 2008, Box 6.3

A Historical Perspective on International Financial Crises

October 2009, Box 4.1

The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: 100 Years of Dealing with Public Debt Overhangs

October 2012, Chapter 3

What Is the Effect of Recessions?

October 2015, Box 1.1

III. Economic Growth—Sources and Patterns
Asia Rising: Patterns of Economic Development and Growth	September 2006, Chapter 3
Japan’s Potential Output and Productivity Growth

September 2006, Box 3.1

The Evolution and Impact of Corporate Governance Quality in Asia

September 2006, Box 3.2

Decoupling the Train? Spillovers and Cycles in the Global Economy

April 2007, Chapter 4

Spillovers and International Business Cycle Synchronization: A Broader Perspective

April 2007, Box 4.3

The Discounting Debate

October 2007, Box 1.7

Taxes versus Quantities under Uncertainty (Weitzman, 1974)

October 2007, Box 1.8

Experience with Emissions Trading in the European Union

October 2007, Box 1.9

Climate Change: Economic Impact and Policy Responses

October 2007, Appendix 1.2

What Risks Do Housing Markets Pose for Global Growth?

October 2007, Box 2.1

The Changing Dynamics of the Global Business Cycle

October 2007, Chapter 5

Major Economies and Fluctuations in Global Growth

October 2007, Box 5.1

Improved Macroeconomic Performance—Good Luck or Good Policies?

October 2007, Box 5.2

House Prices: Corrections and Consequences

October 2008, Box 1.2

Global Business Cycles

April 2009, Box 1.1

How Similar Is the Current Crisis to the Great Depression?

April 2009, Box 3.1

Is Credit a Vital Ingredient for Recovery? Evidence from Industry-Level Data

April 2009, Box 3.2

From Recession to Recovery: How Soon and How Strong?

April 2009, Chapter 3

What’s the Damage? Medium-Term Output Dynamics after Financial Crises

October 2009, Chapter 4

Will the Recovery Be Jobless?

October 2009, Box 1.3

Unemployment Dynamics during Recessions and Recoveries: Okun’s Law and Beyond

April 2010, Chapter 3

Does Slow Growth in Advanced Economies Necessarily Imply Slow Growth in Emerging Economies?

October 2010, Box 1.1

The Global Recovery: Where Do We Stand?

April 2012, Box 1.2

How Does Uncertainty Affect Economic Performance?

October 2012, Box 1.3

Resilience in Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Will It Last?

October 2012, Chapter 4

Jobs and Growth: Can’t Have One without the Other?

October 2012, Box 4.1

Spillovers from Policy Uncertainty in the United States and Europe

April 2013, Chapter 2,
Spillover Feature

Breaking through the Frontier: Can Today’s Dynamic Low-Income Countries Make It?

April 2013, Chapter 4

What Explains the Slowdown in the BRICS?

October 2013, Box 1.2

Dancing Together? Spillovers, Common Shocks, and the Role of Financial and Trade Linkages

October 2013, Chapter 3

Output Synchronicity in the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan and in the
Caucasus and Central Asia

October 2013, Box 3.1

Spillovers from Changes in U.S. Monetary Policy

October 2013, Box 3.2

Saving and Economic Growth

April 2014, Box 3.1

On the Receiving End? External Conditions and Emerging Market Growth before, during,
and after the Global Financial Crisis

April 2014, Chapter 4

The Impact of External Conditions on Medium-Term Growth in Emerging Market Economies

April 2014, Box 4.1

The Origins of IMF Growth Forecast Revisions since 2011

October 2014, Box 1.2

274

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

SELECTED TOPICS

Underlying Drivers of U.S. Yields Matter for Spillovers	October 2014, Chapter 2,
Spillover Feature
Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment

October 2014, Chapter 3

The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies

October 2014, Box 3.4

Where Are We Headed? Perspectives on Potential Output

April 2015, Chapter 3

Steady As She Goes—Estimating Sustainable Output

April 2015, Box 3.1

Macroeconomic Developments and Outlook in Low-Income Developing Countries—
The Role of External Factors

April 2016, Box 1.2

Time for a Supply-Side Boost? Macroeconomic Effects of Labor and Product Market
Reforms in Advanced Economies

April 2016, Chapter 3

Road Less Traveled: Growth in Emerging Market and Developing Economies in a Complicated
External Environment

April 2017, Chapter 3

Growing with Flows: Evidence from Industry-Level Data

April 2017, Box 2.2

Emerging Market and Developing Economy Growth: Heterogeneity and Income Convergence
Overthe Forecast Horizon

October 2017, Box 1.3

IV. Inflation and Deflation and Commodity Markets
The Boom in Nonfuel Commodity Prices: Can It Last?

September 2006, Chapter 5

International Oil Companies and National Oil Companies in a Changing Oil Sector Environment

September 2006, Box 1.4

Commodity Price Shocks, Growth, and Financing in Sub-Saharan Africa

September 2006, Box 2.2

Has Speculation Contributed to Higher Commodity Prices?

September 2006, Box 5.1

Agricultural Trade Liberalization and Commodity Prices

September 2006, Box 5.2

Recent Developments in Commodity Markets	September 2006,
Appendix 2.1
Who Is Harmed by the Surge in Food Prices?

October 2007, Box 1.1

Refinery Bottlenecks

October 2007, Box 1.5

Making the Most of Biofuels

October 2007, Box 1.6

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects

April 2008, Appendix 1.2

Dollar Depreciation and Commodity Prices

April 2008, Box 1.4

Why Hasn’t Oil Supply Responded to Higher Prices?

April 2008, Box 1.5

Oil Price Benchmarks

April 2008, Box 1.6

Globalization, Commodity Prices, and Developing Countries

April 2008, Chapter 5

The Current Commodity Price Boom in Perspective

April 2008, Box 5.2

Is Inflation Back? Commodity Prices and Inflation

October 2008, Chapter 3

Does Financial Investment Affect Commodity Price Behavior?

October 2008, Box 3.1

Fiscal Responses to Recent Commodity Price Increases: An Assessment

October 2008, Box 3.2

Monetary Policy Regimes and Commodity Prices

October 2008, Box 3.3

Assessing Deflation Risks in the G3 Economies

April 2009, Box 1.3

Will Commodity Prices Rise Again When the Global Economy Recovers?

April 2009, Box 1.5

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects

April 2009, Appendix 1.1

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects

October 2009, Appendix 1.1

What Do Options Markets Tell Us about Commodity Price Prospects?

October 2009, Box 1.6

What Explains the Rise in Food Price Volatility?

October 2009, Box 1.7

How Unusual Is the Current Commodity Price Recovery?

April 2010, Box 1.2

Commodity Futures Price Curves and Cyclical Market Adjustment

April 2010, Box 1.3

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects

October 2010, Appendix 1.1

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

275

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH: SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

Dismal Prospects for the Real Estate Sector

October 2010, Box 1.2

Have Metals Become More Scarce and What Does Scarcity Mean for Prices?

October 2010, Box 1.5

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects

April 2011, Appendix 1.2

Oil Scarcity, Growth, and Global Imbalances

April 2011, Chapter 3

Life Cycle Constraints on Global Oil Production

April 2011, Box 3.1

Unconventional Natural Gas: A Game Changer?

April 2011, Box 3.2

Short-Term Effects of Oil Shocks on Economic Activity

April 2011, Box 3.3

Low-Frequency Filtering for Extracting Business Cycle Trends

April 2011, Appendix 3.1

The Energy and Oil Empirical Models

April 2011, Appendix 3.2

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects

September 2011, Appendix 1.1

Financial Investment, Speculation, and Commodity Prices

September 2011, Box 1.4

Target What You Can Hit: Commodity Price Swings and Monetary Policy

September 2011, Chapter 3

Commodity Market Review	April 2012, Chapter 1,
Special Feature
Commodity Price Swings and Commodity Exporters

April 2012, Chapter 4

Macroeconomic Effects of Commodity Price Shocks on Low-Income Countries

April 2012, Box 4.1

Volatile Commodity Prices and the Development Challenge in Low-Income Countries

April 2012, Box 4.2

Commodity Market Review

October 2012, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

Unconventional Energy in the United States

October 2012, Box 1.4

Food Supply Crunch: Who Is Most Vulnerable?

October 2012, Box 1.5

Commodity Market Review

April 2013, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

The Dog That Didn’t Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was It Just Sleeping?

April 2013, Chapter 3

Does Inflation Targeting Still Make Sense with a Flatter Phillips Curve?

April 2013, Box 3.1

Commodity Market Review

October 2013, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

Energy Booms and the Current Account: Cross-Country Experience

October 2013, Box 1.SF.1

Oil Price Drivers and the Narrowing WTI-Brent Spread

October 2013, Box 1.SF.2

Anchoring Inflation Expectations When Inflation Is Undershooting

April 2014, Box 1.3

Commodity Prices and Forecasts	April 2014, Chapter 1,
Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Natural Gas
in the World Economy

October 2014, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Investment
in an Era of Low Oil Prices

April 2015, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

The Oil Price Collapse: Demand or Supply?

April 2015, Box 1.1

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Metals in the World Economy

October 2015, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

The New Frontiers of Metal Extraction: The North-to-South Shift

October 2015, Chapter 1,
Special Feature Box 1.SF.1

Where Are Commodity Exporters Headed? Output Growth in the Aftermath
of the Commodity Boom

October 2015, Chapter 2

The Not-So-Sick Patient: Commodity Booms and the Dutch Disease Phenomenon

October 2015, Box 2.1

Do Commodity Exporters’ Economies Overheat during Commodity Booms?

October 2015, Box 2.4

April 2016, Chapter 1,
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the
Energy Transition in an Era of Low Fossil Fuel Prices	Special Feature
Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

276

October 2016, Chapter 3

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

SELECTED TOPICS

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Food Security and
Markets in the World Economy

October 2016, Chapter 1,
Special Feature
October 2016, Box 3.3

How Much Do Global Prices Matter for Food Inflation?
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, With a Focus on the Role Technology and
Unconventional Sources in the Global Oil Market

April 2017, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
October 2017, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature

V. Fiscal Policy
Improved Emerging Market Fiscal Performance: Cyclical or Structural?

September 2006, Box 2.1

When Does Fiscal Stimulus Work?

April 2008, Box 2.1

Fiscal Policy as a Countercyclical Tool

October 2008, Chapter 5

Differences in the Extent of Automatic Stabilizers and Their Relationship with Discretionary Fiscal Policy

October 2008, Box 5.1

Why Is It So Hard to Determine the Effects of Fiscal Stimulus?

October 2008, Box 5.2

Have the U.S. Tax Cuts Been “TTT” [Timely, Temporary, and Targeted]?

October 2008, Box 5.3

Will It Hurt? Macroeconomic Effects of Fiscal Consolidation

October 2010, Chapter 3

Separated at Birth? The Twin Budget and Trade Balances

September 2011, Chapter 4

Are We Underestimating Short-Term Fiscal Multipliers?

October 2012, Box 1.1

The Implications of High Public Debt in Advanced Economies

October 2012, Box 1.2

The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: 100 Years of Dealing with Public Debt Overhangs

October 2012, Chapter 3

The Great Divergence of Policies

April 2013, Box 1.1

Public Debt Overhang and Private Sector Performance

April 2013, Box 1.2

Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment

October 2014, Chapter 3

Improving the Efficiency of Public Investment

October 2014, Box 3.2

The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies

October 2014, Box 3.4

Fiscal Institutions, Rules, and Public Investment

October 2014, Box 3.5

Commodity Booms and Public Investment

October 2015, Box 2.2

Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant

October 2017, Chapter 4

The Spillover Impact of U.S. Government Spending Shocks on External Positions

October 2017, Box 4.1

VI. Monetary Policy, Financial Markets, and Flow of Funds
How Do Financial Systems Affect Economic Cycles?

September 2006, Chapter 4

Financial Leverage and Debt Deflation

September 2006, Box 4.1

Financial Linkages and Spillovers

April 2007, Box 4.1

Macroeconomic Conditions in Industrial Countries and Financial Flows to Emerging Markets

April 2007, Box 4.2

Macroeconomic Implications of Recent Market Turmoil: Patterns from Previous Episodes

October 2007, Box 1.2

What Is Global Liquidity?

October 2007, Box 1.4

The Changing Housing Cycle and the Implications for Monetary Policy

April 2008, Chapter 3

Is There a Credit Crunch?

April 2008, Box 1.1

Assessing Vulnerabilities to Housing Market Corrections

April 2008, Box 3.1

Financial Stress and Economic Downturns

October 2008, Chapter 4

The Latest Bout of Financial Distress: How Does It Change the Global Outlook?

October 2008, Box 1.1

Policies to Resolve Financial System Stress and Restore Sound Financial Intermediation

October 2008, Box 4.1

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

277

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH: SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

How Vulnerable Are Nonfinancial Firms?

April 2009, Box 1.2

The Case of Vanishing Household Wealth

April 2009, Box 2.1

Impact of Foreign Bank Ownership during Home-Grown Crises

April 2009, Box 4.1

A Financial Stress Index for Emerging Economies

April 2009, Appendix 4.1

Financial Stress in Emerging Economies: Econometric Analysis

April 2009, Appendix 4.2

How Linkages Fuel the Fire

April 2009, Chapter 4

Lessons for Monetary Policy from Asset Price Fluctuations

October 2009, Chapter 3

Were Financial Markets in Emerging Economies More Resilient than in Past Crises?

October 2009, Box 1.2

Risks from Real Estate Markets

October 2009, Box 1.4

Financial Conditions Indices

April 2011, Appendix 1.1

House Price Busts in Advanced Economies: Repercussions for Global Financial Markets

April 2011, Box 1.1

International Spillovers and Macroeconomic Policymaking

April 2011, Box 1.3

Credit Boom-Bust Cycles: Their Triggers and Policy Implications

September 2011, Box 1.2

Are Equity Price Drops Harbingers of Recession?

September 2011, Box 1.3

Cross-Border Spillovers from Euro Area Bank Deleveraging

April 2012, Chapter 2,
Spillover Feature

The Financial Transmission of Stress in the Global Economy

October 2012, Chapter 2,
Spillover Feature

The Great Divergence of Policies

April 2013, Box 1.1

Taper Talks: What to Expect When the United States Is Tightening

October 2013, Box 1.1

Credit Supply and Economic Growth

April 2014, Box 1.1

Should Advanced Economies Worry about Growth Shocks in Emerging Market Economies?	April 2014, Chapter 2,
Spillover Feature
Perspectives on Global Real Interest Rates

April 2014, Chapter 3

Housing Markets across the Globe: An Update

October 2014, Box 1.1

U.S. Monetary Policy and Capital Flows to Emerging Markets

April 2016, Box 2.2

A Transparent Risk-Management Approach to Monetary Policy

October 2016, Box 3.5

Will the Revival in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets be Sustained?

October 2017, Box 1.2

VII. Labor Markets, Poverty, and Inequality
The Globalization of Labor

April 2007, Chapter 5

Emigration and Trade: How Do They Affect Developing Countries?

April 2007, Box 5.1

Labor Market Reforms in the Euro Area and the Wage-Unemployment Trade-Off

October 2007, Box 2.2

Globalization and Inequality

October 2007, Chapter 4

The Dualism between Temporary and Permanent Contracts: Measures, Effects, and Policy Issues

April 2010, Box 3.1

Short-Time Work Programs

April 2010, Box 3.2

Slow Recovery to Nowhere? A Sectoral View of Labor Markets in Advanced Economies

September 2011, Box 1.1

The Labor Share in Europe and the United States during and after the Great Recession

April 2012, Box 1.1

Jobs and Growth: Can’t Have One without the Other?

October 2012, Box 4.1

Reforming Collective-Bargaining Systems to Achieve High and Stable Employment

April 2016, Box 3.2

Understanding the Downward Trend in Labor Shares

April 2017, Chapter 3

VIII. Exchange Rate Issues
How Emerging Market Countries May Be Affected by External Shocks

September 2006, Box 1.3

Exchange Rates and the Adjustment of External Imbalances

April 2007, Chapter 3

278

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

SELECTED TOPICS

Exchange Rate Pass-Through to Trade Prices and External Adjustment

April 2007, Box 3.3

Depreciation of the U.S. Dollar: Causes and Consequences

April 2008, Box 1.2

Lessons from the Crisis: On the Choice of Exchange Rate Regime

April 2010, Box 1.1

Exchange Rate Regimes and Crisis Susceptibility in Emerging Markets

April 2014, Box 1.4

Exchange Rates and Trade Flows: Disconnected?

October 2015, Chapter 3

The Relationship between Exchange Rates and
Global-Value-Chain-Related Trade

October 2015, Box 3.1

Measuring Real Effective Exchange Rates and Competitiveness:
The Role of Global Value Chains

October 2015, Box 3.2

Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies

October 2017, Box 1.1

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

October 2017, Chapter 2

Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level

October 2017, Box 2.1

Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-level Evidence

October 2017, Box 2.2

Wage and Employment Adjustment After the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-level Evidence

October 2017, Box 2.3

IX. External Payments, Trade, Capital Movements, and Foreign Debt
Capital Flows to Emerging Market Countries: A Long-Term Perspective

September 2006, Box 1.1

How Will Global Imbalances Adjust?

September 2006, Box 2.1

External Sustainability and Financial Integration

April 2007, Box 3.1

Large and Persistent Current Account Imbalances

April 2007, Box 3.2

Multilateral Consultation on Global Imbalances

October 2007, Box 1.3

Managing the Macroeconomic Consequences of Large and Volatile Aid Flows

October 2007, Box 2.3

Managing Large Capital Inflows

October 2007, Chapter 3

Can Capital Controls Work?

October 2007, Box 3.1

Multilateral Consultation on Global Imbalances: Progress Report

April 2008, Box 1.3

How Does the Globalization of Trade and Finance Affect Growth? Theory and Evidence

April 2008, Box 5.1

Divergence of Current Account Balances across Emerging Economies

October 2008, Chapter 6

Current Account Determinants for Oil-Exporting Countries

October 2008, Box 6.1

Sovereign Wealth Funds: Implications for Global Financial Markets

October 2008, Box 6.2

Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis

April 2009, Box 1.4

Trade Finance and Global Trade: New Evidence from Bank Surveys

October 2009, Box 1.1

From Deficit to Surplus: Recent Shifts in Global Current Accounts

October 2009, Box 1.5

Getting the Balance Right: Transitioning out of Sustained Current Account Surpluses

April 2010, Chapter 4

Emerging Asia: Responding to Capital Inflows

October 2010, Box 2.1

Latin America-5: Riding Another Wave of Capital Inflows

October 2010, Box 2.2

Do Financial Crises Have Lasting Effects on Trade?

October 2010, Chapter 4

Unwinding External Imbalances in the European Union Periphery

April 2011, Box 2.1

International Capital Flows: Reliable or Fickle?

April 2011, Chapter 4

External Liabilities and Crisis Tipping Points

September 2011, Box 1.5

The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area

April 2013, Box 1.3

External Rebalancing in the Euro Area

October 2013, Box 1.3

The Yin and Yang of Capital Flow Management: Balancing Capital Inflows with Capital Outflows

October 2013, Chapter 4

Simulating Vulnerability to International Capital Market Conditions

October 2013, Box 4.1

The Trade Implications of the U.S. Shale Gas Boom

October 2014, Box 1.SF.1

Are Global Imbalances at a Turning Point?

October 2014, Chapter 4

Switching Gears: The 1986 External Adjustment

October 2014, Box 4.1

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

279

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH: SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

A Tale of Two Adjustments: East Asia and the Euro Area

October 2014, Box 4.2

Understanding the Role of Cyclical and Structural Factors in the Global Trade Slowdown

April 2015, Box 1.2

Small Economies, Large Current Account Deficits

October 2015, Box 1.2

Capital Flows and Financial Deepening in Developing Economies

October 2015, Box 1.3

Dissecting the Global Trade Slowdown

April 2016, Box 1.1

Understanding the Slowdown in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets

April 2016, Chapter 2

Capital Flows to Low-Income Developing Countries

April 2016, Box 2.1

The Potential Productivity Gains from Further Trade and Foreign Direct Investment Liberalization

April 2016, Box 3.3

Global Trade: What’s Behind the Slowdown

October 2016, Chapter 2

The Evolution of Emerging Market and Developing Economies’ Trade Integration with
China’s Final Demand

April 2017, Box 2.3

Shifts in the Global Allocation of Capital: Implications for Emerging Market and
Developing Economies

April 2017, Box 2.4

Macroeconomic Adjustment in Emerging Market Commodity Exporters

October 2017, Box 1.4

Remittances and Consumption Smoothing

October 2017, Box 1.5

X. Regional Issues
EMU: 10 Years On

October 2008, Box 2.1

Vulnerabilities in Emerging Economies

April 2009, Box 2.2

East-West Linkages and Spillovers in Europe

April 2012, Box 2.1

The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area

April 2013, Box 1.3

XI. Country-Specific Analyses
Why Is the U.S. International Income Account Still in the Black, and Will This Last?

September 2005, Box 1.2

Is India Becoming an Engine for Global Growth?

September 2005, Box 1.4

Saving and Investment in China

September 2005, Box 2.1

China’s GDP Revision: What Does It Mean for China and the Global Economy?

April 2006, Box 1.6

What Do Country Studies of the Impact of Globalization on Inequality Tell Us?
Examples from Mexico, China, and India

October 2007, Box 4.2

Japan after the Plaza Accord

April 2010, Box 4.1

Taiwan Province of China in the Late 1980s

April 2010, Box 4.2

Did the Plaza Accord Cause Japan’s Lost Decades?

April 2011, Box 1.4

Where Is China’s External Surplus Headed?

April 2012, Box 1.3

The U.S. Home Owners’ Loan Corporation

April 2012, Box 3.1

Household Debt Restructuring in Iceland

April 2012, Box 3.2

Abenomics: Risks after Early Success?

October 2013, Box 1.4

Is China’s Spending Pattern Shifting (away from Commodities)?

April 2014, Box 1.2

Public Investment in Japan during the Lost Decade

October 2014, Box 3.1

Japanese Exports: What’s the Holdup?

October 2015, Box 3.3

The Japanese Experience with Deflation

October 2016, Box 3.2

XII. Special Topics
Climate Change and the Global Economy

April 2008, Chapter 4

Rising Car Ownership in Emerging Economies: Implications for Climate Change

April 2008, Box 4.1

South Asia: Illustrative Impact of an Abrupt Climate Shock

April 2008, Box 4.2

280

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

SELECTED TOPICS

Macroeconomic Policies for Smoother Adjustment to Abrupt Climate Shocks

April 2008, Box 4.3

Catastrophe Insurance and Bonds: New Instruments to Hedge Extreme Weather Risks

April 2008, Box 4.4

Recent Emission-Reduction Policy Initiatives

April 2008, Box 4.5

Complexities in Designing Domestic Mitigation Policies

April 2008, Box 4.6

Getting By with a Little Help from a Boom: Do Commodity
Windfalls Speed Up Human Development?

October 2015, Box 2.3

Breaking the Deadlock: Identifying the Political Economy Drivers of Structural Reforms

April 2016, Box 3.1

Can Reform Waves Turn the Tide? Some Case Studies Using the Synthetic Control Method

April 2016, Box 3.4

A Global Rush for Land

October 2016, Box 1.SF.1

Within-Country Trends in Income per Capita: The Case of the Brazil, Russia, India, China,
and South Africa

April 2017, Box 2.1

Technological Progress and Labor Shares: A Historical Overview

April 2017, Box 3.1

The Elasticity of Substitution Between Capital and Labor: Concept and Estimation

April 2017, Box 3.2

Routine Tasks, Automation, and Economic Dislocation Around the World

April 2017, Box 3.3

Adjustments to the Labor Share of Income

April 2017, Box 3.4

Conflict, Growth, and Migration

April 2017, Box 1.1

Tackling Measurement Challenges of Irish Economic Activity

April 2017, Box 1.2

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

October 2017, Chapter 3

The Growth Impact of Tropical Cyclones

October 2017, Box 3.1

The Role of Policies in Coping with Weather Shocks: A Model-Based Analysis

October 2017, Box 3.2

Strategies for Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: Selected Case Studies

October 2017, Box 3.3

Coping with Weather Shocks: The Role of Financial Markets

October 2017, Box 3.4

Historical Climate, Economic Development, and the World Income Distribution

October 2017, Box 3.5

Mitigating Climate Change

October 2017, Box 3.6

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

281

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

IMF EXECUTIVE BOARD DISCUSSION OF THE OUTLOOK,
OCTOBER 2017

The following remarks were made by the Chair at the conclusion of the Executive Board’s discussion of the
Fiscal Monitor, Global Financial Stability Report, and World Economic Outlook on September 21, 2017.

E

xecutive Directors broadly shared the assessment of global economic prospects and
risks. They observed that global activity has
strengthened further and is expected to rise
steadily into next year. The pickup is broad based
across countries, driven by investment and trade. Nevertheless, the recovery is not complete, with mediumterm global growth remaining modest, especially
in advanced economies and fuel exporters. In most
advanced economies, inflation remains subdued amid
weak wage growth, while slow productivity growth and
worsening demographic profiles weigh on mediumterm prospects. Meanwhile, several emerging markets
and developing economies continue to adjust to a
range of factors, including lower commodity revenues.
Directors noted that, while risks are broadly balanced in the near term, medium-term risks remain
skewed to the downside, with rising financial vulnerabilities. These include the possibility of a sudden tightening of global financial conditions, a rapid increase in
private sector debt in key emerging market economies,
low bank profitability and pockets of still-elevated nonperforming loan ratios, and policy uncertainty about
financial deregulation. Directors also pointed to risks
associated with inward-looking policies, rising geopolitical tensions, and weather-related factors.
Given this landscape, Directors underscored the
continued importance of employing a range of policy
tools, in a comprehensive, consistent, and well-​
communicated manner, to secure the recovery and
improve medium-term prospects. They recognized that
major central banks have made every effort to communicate their monetary normalization policies to markets.
The cyclical upturn in economic activity provides a
window of opportunity to accelerate critical structural
reforms, increase resilience, and promote inclusiveness.
Directors stressed that a cooperative multilateral
framework remains vital for amplifying the mutual
benefits of national policies and minimizing any

cross-border spillovers. Common challenges include
maintaining the rules-based, open trading system;
preserving the resilience of the global financial system;
avoiding competitive races to the bottom in taxation
and financial regulation; and further strengthening the
global financial safety net. Multilateral cooperation is
also essential to tackle various noneconomic challenges,
among which are refugee flows, cyberthreats and, as
most Directors highlighted, mitigating and adapting
to climate change. Concerted effort is also needed to
reduce excess global imbalances, through a recalibration of policies with a view to achieving their domestic
objectives as well as strengthening prospects for strong,
sustainable, and balanced global growth. In this context, as a few Directors emphasized, the IMF also has a
role to play by continuing to strengthen its multilateral
analysis of external imbalances and exchange rates.
Directors agreed that continued accommodative
monetary policy is still needed in countries with low
core inflation, consistent with central banks’ mandates.
Fiscal policy should gear toward long-term sustainability, avoid procyclicality, and promote inclusive
growth. At the same time, fiscal policy should be as
growth friendly as possible, using space, where available, to support productivity and growth-enhancing
structural reforms. In many cases, policymakers should
prioritize rebuilding buffers, improving medium-term
debt dynamics, and enhancing resilience. Efforts to
raise potential output should be prioritized based on
country-specific circumstances, including increasing
the supply of labor, upgrading skills and human capital, investing in infrastructure, and lowering product
and labor market distortions. Social safety nets remain
important to protect those adversely affected by technological progress and other structural transformation.
Directors noted that income disparities among
countries have narrowed, but inequality has increased
in some economies. They saw a role that well-designed
fiscal policies can play in achieving redistributive
International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

283

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH—SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES

objectives without necessarily undermining growth and
incentives to work. Directors generally concurred that
there may be scope for strengthening means-testing
of transfers in many countries and for increasing the
progressivity of taxation in some others. Most Directors noted that any consideration of a universal basic
income would have to be weighed carefully against a
host of country-specific factors—including existing
social safety schemes, financing modalities, fiscal cost,
and social preferences, as well as its impact on incentives to work—which, in the view of many Directors,
raised questions about its attractiveness and practicality. Directors emphasized that improving education
and health care is key to reducing inequality and
enhancing social mobility over time.
Directors underlined the continued need for emerging market and developing economies to bolster
economic and financial resilience to external shocks,
including through enhanced macroprudential policy
frameworks and exchange rate flexibility. They noted
that a common challenge across these economies is how
to speed up their convergence toward living standards in
advanced economies. While priorities differ across countries, many need to improve governance, infrastructure,
education, and access to health care. In several countries,
policies should also facilitate greater labor force participation, reduce barriers to entry into product markets,
and enhance the efficiency of credit allocation.

284

Directors observed that the global financial system
continues to strengthen, and market confidence has
improved generally. They recognized the substantial progress made in resolving weak banks in many
advanced economies, while a majority of systemic
institutions are adjusting business models and restoring
profitability. However, a prolonged period of monetary
accommodation could lead to further increases in asset
valuations and a buildup of leverage in the nonfinancial sector that could signal higher risks to financial stability. These developments call for continued
vigilance about household debt ratios and investors’
exposure to market and credit risks. In this context,
Directors stressed the need to calibrate the path of normalization of monetary policies carefully, implement
macro- and microprudential measures as needed, and
address remaining legacy problems.
Directors noted a generally subdued outlook for
commodity prices. They encouraged low-income
developing countries that are commodity exporters to continue improving revenue mobilization and
strengthening debt management, while safeguarding
social outlays and capital expenditures. Countries with
more diversified export bases should further strengthen
fiscal positions and foreign exchange buffers. Across all
low-income developing countries, an overarching challenge is to maintain progress toward their Sustainable
Development Goals.

International Monetary Fund | October 2017

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

Highlights from IMF Publications
CO
MI
NG
SO
ON

Unleashing Growth and
Strengthening Resilience in
the Caribbean

From Great Depression to Great
Recession: The Elusive Quest for
International Policy Cooperation

$25. ©2017. Paperback
ISBN 978-1-48431-519-4. Approx. 400pp.

$27. ©2017. Paperback
ISBN 978-1-51351-427-7. 256pp.

Fiscal Policies and Gender Equality
$25. ©2017. Paperback
ISBN 978-1-51359-036-3.

MI
NG
SO
ON

$25. ©2017. Paperback
ISBN 978-1-48431-522-4. Approx. 263pp
Free download visit: bookstore.imf.org/drpf

CO

AD
LO E
WN BL
DO L A
EE AI
F R AV

Digital Revolutions in Public Finance

Financial Integration in
Latin America: A New Strategy
for a New Normal
$25. ©2017. Paperback
ISBN 978-1-51352-024-7. 177pp.

Shifting Commodity Markets
in a Globalized World
$25. ©2017. Paperback
ISBN 978-1-48431-032-8. Approx. 256pp.

To order, visit bookstore.imf.org/we1017
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

