Wo rld Eco nomi c a nd F i na nci a l S u r v e y s

World Economic Outlook
October 2018

Challenges to Steady Growth

I

N

T

E

R

N

A

T

I

O

N

A

L

M

O

N

E

T

A

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

R

Y

F

U

N

D

©2018 International Monetary Fund
Cover and Design: Luisa Menjivar and Jorge Salazar
Composition: AGS, An RR Donnelley Company
Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Joint Bank-Fund Library
Names: International Monetary Fund.
Title: World economic outlook (International Monetary Fund)
Other titles: WEO | Occasional paper (International Monetary Fund) | World economic and
financial surveys.
Description: Washington, DC : International Monetary Fund, 1980- | Semiannual | Some
issues also have thematic titles. | Began with issue for May 1980. | 1981-1984: Occasional
paper / International Monetary Fund, 0251-6365 | 1986-: World economic and financial
surveys, 0256-6877.
Identifiers: ISSN 0256-6877 (print) | ISSN 1564-5215 (online)
Subjects: LCSH: Economic development—Periodicals. | International economic relations—
Periodicals. | Debts, External—Periodicals. | Balance of payments—Periodicals. |
International finance—Periodicals. | Economic forecasting—Periodicals.
Classification: LCC HC10.W79
HC10.80
ISBN 978-1-48437-679-9 (paper)
978-1-48437-719-2 (Web PDF)
978-1-48437-735-2 (ePub)
978-1-48437-736-9 (Mobi)

The World Economic Outlook (WEO) is a survey by the IMF staff published twice a
year, in the spring and fall. The WEO is prepared by the IMF staff and has benefited
from comments and suggestions by Executive Directors following their discussion of the
report on September 20, 2018. The views expressed in this publication are those of the
IMF staff and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF’s Executive Directors
or their national authorities.
Recommended citation: International Monetary Fund. 2018. World Economic Outlook:
Challenges to Steady Growth. Washington, DC, October.

Publication orders may be placed online, by fax, or through the mail:
International Monetary Fund, Publication Services
P.O. Box 92780, Washington, DC 20090, USA
Tel.: (202) 623-7430 Fax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org
www.imfbookstore.org
www.elibrary.imf.org

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CONTENTS

Assumptions and Conventions

ix

Further Information

x

Data

xi

Preface

xii

Foreword

xiii

Executive Summary

xvi

Chapter 1. Global Prospects and Policies

1

Recent Developments and Prospects
Forces Shaping the Outlook
The Forecast
Policy Priorities
Scenario Box 1. Global Trade Tensions
Box 1.1. Increasing Market Power
Box 1.2. Growth Outlook: Advanced Economies
Box 1.3. Growth Outlook: Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Box 1.4. Inflation Outlook: Regions and Countries
Box 1.5. Sharp GDP Declines: Some Stylized Facts
Box 1.6. Predicting Recessions and Slowdowns: A Daunting Task
Special Feature: Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Recent
Trends in Energy Demand
Box 1.SF.1. The Demand and Supply of Renewable Energy
References

1
9
12
23
33
36
39
40
42
43
48
52
60
68

Online Annexes
Annex 1.SF.1. Commodity Special Feature
Chapter 2. The Global Recovery 10 Years after the 2008 Financial Meltdown

71

Introduction
Persistent Post–Global Financial Crisis Deviations in Output
Policy Frameworks, Measures, and Postcrisis Output Performance
Summary
Box 2.1. The Global Financial Crisis, Migration, and Fertility
Box 2.2. The Employment Impact of Automation Following the Global Financial Crisis:
The Case of Industrial Robots
Box 2.3. The Role of Financial Sector Repair in the Speed of the Recovery
References

71
73
78
84
86
90
93
97

Online Annexes
Annex 2.1. Data Sources and Country Coverage
Annex 2.2. Additional Details on Quantifying Postcrisis Deviations in Activity from Precrisis Trends
Annex 2.3. Robot Diffusion and Its Employment Impact in the Aftermath of the Crisis
International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

iii

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Chapter 3. Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize
Introduction
Extent of Improvements in Inflation Outcomes
Determinants of Inflation in Emerging Markets
Anchoring of Inflation Expectations
Implications of Anchoring for Monetary Policy
Summary and Policy Implications
Box 3.1. Inflation Dynamics in a Wider Group of Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Box 3.2. Clarity of Central Bank Communications and the Extent of Anchoring of Inflation Expectations
References

101
101
103
105
108
111
116
118
121
123

Online Annexes
Annex 3.1. Data Sources and Country Coverage
Annex 3.2. Determinants of Inflation
Annex 3.3. Anchoring of Inflation Expectations
Annex 3.4. Anchoring of Inflation Expectations and Monetary Policy: Model-Based Guidance
Annex 3.5. The Event Study Methodology for the Taper Tantrum
Annex 3.6. Monetary Policy Reaction Function
Statistical Appendix

127

Assumptions
What’s New
Data and Conventions
Country Notes
Classification of Countries
General Features and Composition of Groups in the World Economic Outlook Classification
Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP,
Exports of Goods and Services, and Population, 2017
Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup
Table C. European Union
Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source of Export Earnings
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, and
Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries and Low-Income Developing Countries
Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods
Table G. Key Data Documentation
Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions Underlying the Projections for Selected Economies
List of Tables
Output (Tables A1–A4)
Inflation (Tables A5–A7)
Financial Policies (Table A8)
Foreign Trade (Table A9)
Current Account Transactions (Tables A10–A12)
Balance of Payments and External Financing (Table A13)
Flow of Funds (Table A14)
Medium-Term Baseline Scenario (Table A15)

127
128
128
129
130
130
131
132
132
133
134
136
137
147
151
152
159
164
165
167
174
178
181

World Economic Outlook, Selected Topics

183

IMF Executive Board Discussion of the Outlook, October 2018

193

iv

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CONTENTS﻿

Tables
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections
Table 1.5.1. Episodes of Declines in GDP per Capita Exceeding 20 Percent
Table 1.5.2. Declines in GDP per Capita: Stylized Facts
Table 1.5.3. Postcrisis Outcomes and Crisis Depth
Table 1.SF.1. Total Demand Determinant for Baseline Specification
Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance,
and Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account
Balance, and Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account
Balance, and Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.4. Commonwealth of Independent States Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.5. Middle East, North African Economies, Afghanistan, and Pakistan: Real GDP,
Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.6. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.7. Summary of World Real per Capita Output
Table 2.1. Total Factor Productivity Deviations Account for Large Share of GDP per Worker Deviations
Table 2.2. Impact of Precrisis Conditions on 2011–13 GDP Deviations from Precrisis Trend
Table 2.3. Financial Sector Support and Discretionary Fiscal Stimulus in Group of Twenty Economies

14
44
46
47
55
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
77
80
83

Online Tables
Annex Table 1.SF.1.1. Contribution to Electrification, 1971–2015
Annex Table 1.SF.1.2. World Energy Usage, 2015 and 1971
Annex Table 1.SF.1.3. Total Demand Determinants, by Varying Specifications
Annex Table 1.SF.1.4. Primary Energy and Electricity Share Determinants
Annex Table 2.1.1. Data Sources
Annex Table 2.1.2. Country Coverage
Annex Table 2.2.1. Banking Crises, 2007–08
Annex Table 2.2.2. Tests of Equality of Distributions of 2015–17 Deviations
Annex Table 2.2.3. Probability of Banking Crisis and the Strength of Restrictions on Banking Activities
Annex Table 2.2.4. Banking Crisis and Regulations: Probit Regression
Annex Table 2.2.5. Impact on 2011–13 GDP Deviations from One Standard Deviation Increase in Drivers
Annex Table 2.2.6. Impact on 2011–13 Investment Deviations from One Standard Deviation Increase in
Drivers
Annex Table 2.2.7. Impact on 2011–13 GDP Deviations from One Standard Deviation Increase in Drivers
by Country Group
Annex Table 2.2.8. Impact on 2015–17 GDP Deviations from One Standard Deviation Increase in Drivers
Annex Table 2.3.1. Sectors, Individual Industries, and Abbreviations Used in Chapter, ISIC Revision and IFR
Sector Classifications
Annex Table 2.3.2. Crisis Exposure and Robot Density, Test in Median
Annex Table 2.3.3. Cross-Section Difference-in-Differences Estimation of Impact of Crisis on Robot Density
Annex Table 2.3.4. Ordinary Least Squares Estimation of Impact of Robot Adoption on Employment Using
Output Loss
Annex Table 2.3.5. Ordinary Least Squares Estimation of Impact of Robot Adoption on Employment by
Medium Skills and High Output Loss
Annex Table 2.3.6. Ordinary Least Squares Estimation of Impact of Robot Adoption on Employment by
Labor Market Policies and Output Loss

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

v

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Annex Table 3.1.1. Data Sources
Annex Table 3.1.2. Country Coverage
Annex Table 3.2.1. Hybrid Phillips Curve: Estimation Results
Annex Table 3.2.2. Hybrid Phillips Curve: Specification Augmented for External Factors
Annex Table 3.2.3. Hybrid Phillips Curve: Alternative Forecast Horizon
Annex Table 3.2.4. Hybrid Phillips Curve: Extensions
Annex Table 3.3.1. Correlation of Relative Ranking across Anchoring Metrics, 2004–18
Annex Table 3.6.1. Estimation of Monetary Policy Rules
Table B1. Advanced Economies: Unemployment, Employment, and Real GDP per Capita
Table B2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
Table B3. Advanced Economies: Hourly Earnings, Productivity, and Unit Labor Costs in Manufacturing
Table B4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices
Table B5. Summary of Fiscal and Financial Indicators
Table B6. Advanced Economies: General and Central Government Net Lending/Borrowing and General
Government Net Lending/Borrowing Excluding Social Security Schemes
Table B7. Advanced Economies: General Government Structural Balances
Table B8. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government Net Lending/Borrowing and
Overall Fiscal Balance
Table B9. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government Net Lending/Borrowing
Table B10. Selected Advanced Economies: Exchange Rates
Table B11. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Broad Money Aggregates
Table B12. Advanced Economies: Export Volumes, Import Volumes, and Terms of Trade in Goods and Services
Table B13. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: Total Trade in Goods
Table B14. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Source of Export Earnings: Total Trade in Goods
Table B15. Summary of Current Account Transactions
Table B16. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Summary of External Debt and Debt Service
Table B17. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: External Debt by Maturity
Table B18. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Analytical Criteria: External Debt by Maturity
Table B19. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Ratio of External Debt to GDP
Table B20. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Debt-Service Ratios
Table B21. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, Medium-Term Baseline Scenario: Selected
Economic Indicators
Figures
Figure 1. Real GDP Growth, by Country Group
Figure 1.1. Global Activity Indicators
Figure 1.2. Commodity and Oil Prices
Figure 1.3. Global Inflation
Figure 1.4. Advanced Economies: Monetary and Financial Market Conditions
Figure 1.5. Real Effective Exchange Rate Changes, February–September 2018
Figure 1.6. Emerging Market Economies: Interest Rates and Spreads
Figure 1.7. Emerging Market Economies: Equity Markets and Credit
Figure 1.8. Emerging Market Economies: Capital Flows
Figure 1.9. Impact of Commodity Price Changes
Figure 1.10. Global Investment and Trade
Figure 1.11. Contributions to GDP Growth
Figure 1.12. Per Capita Real GDP Growth
Figure 1.13. Fiscal Indicators
Figure 1.14. Global Current Account Balance
Figure 1.15. Current Account Balances in Relation to Economic Fundamentals
Figure 1.16. Net International Investment Position
vi

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

xiv
2
3
4
6
6
7
8
8
10
10
11
12
13
17
18
18

CONTENTS﻿

Figure 1.17. Growth for Creditors and Debtors
Figure 1.18. Policy Uncertainty and Trade Tensions
Figure 1.19. Geopolitical Risk Index
Figure 1.20. Risks to the Global Outlook
Figure 1.21. Projected Change in Public Debt
Figure 1.22. Change in the Working-Age Population (15–64) Relative to 2015 Levels
Scenario Figure 1. Real GDP in Trade Tensions Scenario
Figure 1.1.1. Market Power over Time
Figure 1.1.2. Markup Increase, by Subsector
Figure 1.1.3. Advanced Economies: Distribution of Markups of All Firms
Figure 1.1.4. Advanced Economies: Distribution of Markups of Firms, by Industry
Figure 1.5.1. Ongoing Episodes of Large Declines in GDP per Capita
Figure 1.6.1. World Economic Outlook Data: Recessions, Actual and Forecast
Figure 1.6.2. Consensus Economics Data: Recessions, Actual and Forecast
Figure 1.6.3. Severe Slowdowns, Actual and Forecast
Figure 1.6.4. Forecast Errors during Severe Slowdowns
Figure 1.6.5. Forecast Performance
Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments
Figure 1.SF.2. Primary Energy Consumption and Supply
Figure 1.SF.3. Energy Efficiency
Figure 1.SF.4. Energy Demand and GDP per Capita
Figure 1.SF.5. Biomass
Figure 1.SF.6. Primary Energy Source Shares
Figure 1.SF.7. Decomposition of Change in World Coal Intensity
Figure 1.SF.1.1. Renewables Capacity
Figure 2.1. Correlation of GDP Deviations between Periods
Figure 2.2. Postcrisis Change in Inequality
Figure 2.3. Postcrisis Output Deviations from Precrisis Trend, 2015–17
Figure 2.4. Postcrisis Output Deviations from Precrisis Trend by Country Group, 2015–17
Figure 2.5. Postcrisis Investment Deviations from Precrisis Trend: Mean Trajectory
Figure 2.6. Postcrisis Capital Stock Deviations from Precrisis Trend, 2015–17
Figure 2.7. Postcrisis Total Factor Productivity Deviations from Precrisis Trends, 2015–17
Figure 2.8. Changes in Research and Development Expenditure, by Output Losses and
Country Groups
Figure 2.9. Average Change in Robot Density, by Output Losses and Country Groups, 2010–14
Figure 2.10. Probability of Banking Crisis
Figure 2.11. Postcrisis Deviations of Euro Area and Other Advanced Economies
Figure 2.12. Impact on 2015–17 GDP Deviations from One Standard Deviation Increase in Drivers
Figure 2.1.1. International Migration and the Global Financial Crisis
Figure 2.1.2. Impact of Emigration Rate from One Standard Deviation Increase in Drivers at
Different Horizons
Figure 2.1.3. Total Fertility Rate
Figure 2.1.4. Impact of Crisis Exposure on Fertility Rate at Different Horizons
Figure 2.1.5. Impact on Fertility from One Standard Deviation Increase in Drivers at
Different Horizons
Figure 2.2.1. Effect of Robot Diffusion on Employment Growth
Figure 2.2.2. Hollowing-Out Effect of Robot Diffusion on Employment Growth
Figure 2.2.3. Labor Market Policies and Effect of Robot Diffusion on Employment Growth
Figure 2.3.1. Containment and Resolution
Figure 2.3.2. Timing of Recapitalization
Figure 2.3.3. New Share Issuance by Banks
International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

19
22
23
23
25
30
35
36
36
37
37
46
48
49
50
50
51
52
54
56
57
57
58
58
60
73
74
74
75
76
76
77
78
78
81
82
84
86
87
88
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
94
vii

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Figure 2.3.4. Nonperforming Loan Ratio
Figure 2.3.5. Postcrisis Paths
Figure 3.1. Headline Consumer Price Index Inflation
Figure 3.2. Institutional and Policy Changes, Global Shocks, and Financial Conditions
Figure 3.3. Regional Differences and Dispersion in Headline Consumer Price Index Inflation in
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Figure 3.4. Other Measures of Price Inflation in Emerging Markets
Figure 3.5. Inflation Dynamics
Figure 3.6. Coefficient Estimates from the Baseline Phillips Curve Specification
Figure 3.7. Contributions to Deviation of Core Inflation from Target
Figure 3.8. Time Fixed Effects and Common Drivers, by Subperiod
Figure 3.9. Evolution of the Degree of Anchoring of Inflation Expectations, 2000–17
Figure 3.10. Cross-Country Heterogeneity in Degree of Anchoring of Inflation Expectations,
2004–17
Figure 3.11. Anchoring of Inflation Expectations and Policy Frameworks, 2004–17
Figure 3.12. Gains from Anchoring Inflation Expectations
Figure 3.13. Response to the Taper Tantrum
Figure 3.14. Cumulative Exchange Rate Pass-Through
Figure 3.15. Correlation between Detrended Policy Rate and Output Gap, 2004:Q1–2018:Q1
Figure 3.16. Effects of Less-Anchored Inflation Expectations: Regression Results, 2004:Q1–2018:Q1
Figure 3.1.1. Comparison of Macro Characteristics across Country Groups
Figure 3.1.2. Inflation Dynamics
Figure 3.1.3. Inflation, Food Shares, and Commodity Prices
Figure 3.1.4. Central Bank Transparency
Figure 3.2.1. Frequency of Monetary Policy Surprises, 2010–13 versus 2014–18
Figure 3.2.2. Monetary Policy Predictability and Anchoring of Inflation Expectations
Figure 3.2.3. Central Bank Communication and Monetary Policy Predictability

95
96
102
102
104
104
105
106
106
108
109
110
111
113
114
114
115
116
118
119
120
120
121
122
122

Online Figures
Annex Figure 1.SF.1.1 Renewable Total Primary Energy Supply Growth, by Select Regions
Annex Figure 2.2.1. Estimates of Precrisis Trends for the United States
Annex Figure 2.2.2. Structural Break
Annex Figure 2.2.3. Postcrisis Output per Worker Deviations from Precrisis Trend, 2015–17
Annex Figure 2.2.4. Distributions of GDP Deviations after Recessions
Annex Figure 2.2.5. Change in Postcrisis and Precrisis Growth Rates in Sectoral Capital Stock
Annex Figure 2.3.1. Sales of Robots for Professional Services
Annex Figure 2.3.2. Sales of Robots for Domestic/Personal Services
Annex Figure 2.3.3. Average Change in Robot Density (2010–14) and Initial Robot Stock in 2010
Annex Figure 2.3.4. Effect of Crisis Exposure on Robot Diffusion
Annex Figure 3.2.1. Contribution of Domestic and Global Factors to Inflation Dynamics
Annex Figure 3.3.1. Degree of Anchoring, Rolling Windows
Annex Figure 3.5.1. Effect of May 2013 “Taper Tantrum”: Alternative Classification Based on Pre-2013 Data
Annex Figure 3.5.2. Effect of May 2013 “Taper Tantrum”: Alternative Classification Based on Median
Measures
Annex Figure 3.6.1. Net Capital Inflows to Emerging Markets, 2004–18

viii

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

ASSUMPTIONS AND CONVENTIONS
A number of assumptions have been adopted for the projections presented in the World Economic Outlook (WEO). It has
been assumed that real effective exchange rates remained constant at their average levels during July 17 to August 14, 2018,
except for those for the currencies participating in the European exchange rate mechanism II (ERM II), which are assumed
to have remained constant in nominal terms relative to the euro; that established policies of national authorities will be
maintained (for specific assumptions about fiscal and monetary policies for selected economies, see Box A1 in the Statistical
Appendix); that the average price of oil will be $69.38 a barrel in 2018 and $68.76 a barrel in 2019 and will remain
unchanged in real terms over the medium term; that the six-month London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) on US dollar
deposits will average 2.5 percent in 2018 and 3.4 percent in 2019; that the three-month euro deposit rate will average –0.3
percent in 2018 and –0.2 percent in 2019; and that the six-month Japanese yen deposit rate will yield on average 0.0 percent
in 2018 and 0.1 percent in 2019. These are, of course, working hypotheses rather than forecasts, and the uncertainties
surrounding them add to the margin of error that would in any event be involved in the projections. The estimates and
projections are based on statistical information available through September 18, 2018.
The following conventions are used throughout the WEO:
. . . to indicate that data are not available or not applicable;
– 	between years or months (for example, 2017–18 or January–June) to indicate the years or months covered,
including the beginning and ending years or months; and
/
between years or months (for example, 2017/18) to indicate a fiscal or financial year.
“Billion” means a thousand million; “trillion” means a thousand billion.
“Basis points” refers to hundredths of 1 percentage point (for example, 25 basis points are equivalent to ¼ of 1 percentage point).
Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a few countries that use fiscal years. Table F in the Statistical Appendix
lists the economies with exceptional reporting periods for national accounts and government finance data for each country.
For some countries, the figures for 2017 and earlier are based on estimates rather than actual outturns. Table G in the
Statistical Appendix lists the latest actual outturns for the indicators in the national accounts, prices, government finance, and
balance of payments indicators for each country.
What is new in this publication:
• Argentina’s consumer prices, which were previously excluded from the group composites because of data constraints, are
now included starting from 2017 onward.
• Data for Aruba are included in the data aggregated for the emerging market and developing economies.
• Egypt’s forecast data, from which the nominal exchange rate assumptions are calculated, were previously excluded because
the nominal exchange rate was a market sensitive issue; they are now made public.
• Swaziland is now called Eswatini.
• Venezuela redenominated its currency on August 20, 2018, by replacing 100,000 bolívares Fuertes (VEF) with 1 bolívar
Soberano (VES). Local currency data, including the historical data, for Venezuela are expressed in the new currency
beginning with the October 2018 WEO database.
In the tables and figures, the following conventions apply:
• If no source is listed on tables and figures, data are drawn from the WEO database.
• When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
• Minor discrepancies between sums of constituent figures and totals shown reflect rounding.
As used in this report, the terms “country” and “economy” do not in all cases refer to a territorial entity that is a state as
understood by international law and practice. As used here, the term also covers some territorial entities that are not states
but for which statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
Composite data are provided for various groups of countries organized according to economic characteristics or region. Unless
noted otherwise, country group composites represent calculations based on 90 percent or more of the weighted group data.
The boundaries, colors, denominations, and any other information shown on the maps do not imply, on the part of
the International Monetary Fund, any judgment on the legal status of any territory or any endorsement or acceptance of
such boundaries.
International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

ix

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY

FURTHER INFORMATION

Corrections and Revisions
The data and analysis appearing in the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are compiled by the IMF staff at the
time of publication. Every effort is made to ensure their timeliness, accuracy, and completeness. When errors are
discovered, corrections and revisions are incorporated into the digital editions available from the IMF website and
on the IMF eLibrary (see below). All substantive changes are listed in the online tables of contents.

Print and Digital Editions
Print copies of this World Economic Outlook can be ordered at https://www.bookstore.imf.org/books/title/
world-economic-outlook-october-2018.
The WEO is featured on the IMF website at http://www.imf.org/publications/WEO. This site includes a PDF
of the report and data sets for each of the charts therein.
The IMF eLibrary hosts multiple digital editions of the World Economic Outlook, including ePub, enhanced
PDF, Mobi, and HTML: http://elibrary.imf.org/OCT18WEO.

Copyright and Reuse
Information on the terms and conditions for reusing the contents of this publication are at http://www.
imf.org/external/terms.htm.

x

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

DATA

This version of the World Economic Outlook (WEO) is available in full through the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.
imf.org) and the IMF website (www.imf.org). Accompanying the publication on the IMF website is a larger compilation of data from the WEO database than is included in the report itself, including files containing the series most
frequently requested by readers. These files may be downloaded for use in a variety of software packages.
The data appearing in the WEO are compiled by the IMF staff at the time of the WEO exercises. The historical data and projections are based on the information gathered by the IMF country desk officers in the context
of their missions to IMF member countries and through their ongoing analysis of the evolving situation in each
country. Historical data are updated on a continual basis as more information becomes available, and structural
breaks in data are often adjusted to produce smooth series with the use of splicing and other techniques. IMF
staff estimates continue to serve as proxies for historical series when complete information is unavailable. As a
result, WEO data can differ from those in other sources with official data, including the IMF’s International
Financial Statistics.
The WEO data and metadata provided are “as is” and “as available,” and every effort is made to ensure their
timeliness, accuracy, and completeness, but these cannot be guaranteed. When errors are discovered, there is a
concerted effort to correct them as appropriate and feasible. Corrections and revisions made after publication are
incorporated into the electronic editions available from the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.imf.org) and on the IMF
website (www.imf.org). All substantive changes are listed in detail in the online tables of contents.
For details on the terms and conditions for usage of the WEO database, please refer to the IMF Copyright and
Usage website (www.imf.org/external/terms.htm).
Inquiries about the content of the WEO and the WEO database should be sent by mail, fax, or online forum
(telephone inquiries cannot be accepted):
World Economic Studies Division
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431, USA
Fax: (202) 623-6343
Online Forum: www.imf.org/weoforum

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

xi

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY

PREFACE

The analysis and projections contained in the World Economic Outlook are integral elements of the IMF’s
surveillance of economic developments and policies in its member countries, of developments in international
financial markets, and of the global economic system. The survey of prospects and policies is the product
of a comprehensive interdepartmental review of world economic developments, which draws primarily on
information the IMF staff gathers through its consultations with member countries. These consultations are
carried out in particular by the IMF’s area departments—namely, the African Department, Asia and Pacific
Department, European Department, Middle East and Central Asia Department, and Western Hemisphere
Department—together with the Strategy, Policy, and Review Department; the Monetary and Capital Markets
Department; and the Fiscal Affairs Department.
The analysis in this report was coordinated in the Research Department under the general direction of
Maurice Obstfeld, Economic Counsellor and Director of Research. The project was directed by Gian Maria
Milesi-Ferretti, Deputy Director, Research Department; and Oya Celasun, Division Chief, Research Department.
The primary contributors to this report were Rudolfs Bems, Christian Bogmans, Francesca Caselli, Wenjie Chen,
Francesco Grigoli, Bertrand Gruss, Zsóka Kóczán, Toh Kuan, Weicheng Lian, Akito Matsumoto, Mico Mrkaic, Malhar
Nabar, Natalija Novta, Andrea Pescatori, and Petia Topalova.
Other contributors include Michal Andrle, Gavin Asdorian, Luisa Calixto, Yan Carrière-Swallow, Federico Diez,
Angela Espiritu, Rachel Yuting Fan, Gregg Forte, Meron Haile, Mandy Hemmati, Benjamin Hilgenstock,
Ava Yeabin Hong, Benjamin Hunt, Deniz Igan, Christopher Johns, Lama Kiyasseh, Jungjin Lee, Daniel Leigh,
Daniela Muhaj, Susanna Mursula, Cynthia Nyanchama Nyakeri, Emory Oakes, Rafael Portillo, Evgenia Pugacheva,
Adrian Robles Villamil, Susie Xiaohui Sun, Suchanan Tambunlertchai, Nicholas Tong, Julia Xueliang Wang,
Shan Wang, Jilun Xing, Juan Yépez, Yuan Zeng, Qiaoqiao Zhang, Candice Huiyuan Zhao, Caroline Chenqi Zhou,
and Jillian Zirnhelt.
Joseph Procopio from the Communications Department led the editorial team for the report, with production
and editorial support from Christine Ebrahimzadeh and Linda Kean and editorial assistance from James Unwin,
Lucy Scott Morales, Sherrie Brown, and Vector Talent Resources.
The analysis has benefited from comments and suggestions by staff members from other IMF departments,
as well as by Executive Directors following their discussion of the report on September 20, 2018. However,
both projections and policy considerations are those of the IMF staff and should not be attributed to Executive
Directors or to their national authorities.

xii

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

FOREWORD

A

typical foreword to the World Economic
Outlook (WEO) highlights how data
since the previous projection alter our
baseline growth assumptions. It pays
detailed attention to the most recent developments
and interprets the implications for policies going
forward. This WEO foreword—my last—will instead
situate the current conjuncture in a broader historical
context, the better to draw out lessons for the future.
The occasion justifies my unusual approach. This
WEO is appearing shortly after the 10th anniversary of
the Lehman Brothers collapse and, moreover, at a time
of mounting uncertainties—not only over economic
policies but also over the global framework of international relations within which policies are made.
The decade since the global financial crisis of 2008–
09 has indeed brought dramatic economic and political
developments, a trend that seems unlikely to recede any
time soon. How can policymakers guide their economies through the troubled waters ahead? How can
they strengthen and modernize the post–World War II
multilateral system, which supported an unparalleled
70 years of peace and prosperity? To answer, we must
consider not only the impact of the crisis itself but also
the years just before, when some key patterns that have
defined the post-crisis period first emerged.

The Precrisis Decade
It was in the period before the crisis when some of
our current economic vulnerabilities first came to be.
The chart tracks real global growth since 1980, along
with the contributions of advanced economies and of
emerging market and developing economies. After the
Asian crisis (1997–98) and the collapse of the dotcom bubble (2000–01), the growth of emerging market and developing economies accelerated significantly
while advanced economies, even though recovering,
grew at rates below prior levels.
Two things stand out. First, advanced economies’
growth has generally trended downward since the
mid-2000s. This long-term decline stems from aging
workforces and slower productivity growth, which
coincide with falling economic dynamism and rising

Figure 1. Real GDP Growth, by Country Group
(Year over year)
10
8

World
Advanced economies
Emerging/developing economies

6
4
2
0
–2
–4
1980 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18 20 22

Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook, October 2018.
Note: Grey area denotes projections.

market concentration. Notably, the longer-term future
growth rates that the WEO projects for advanced
economies are below current levels.
Second, the start of the new millennium brought
a growth surge in emerging market and developing economies that decisively placed them ahead of
advanced economies’ growth. Rapid Chinese growth
was responsible for some, but clearly not all, of this
decoupling, because the pattern remains even after
subtracting China’s algebraic growth contribution (as
well as India’s, for that matter). The growth acceleration
is a robust consequence of stronger policy frameworks
in many emerging market and developing economies,
including their embrace of more open trade. Because
it also derives from the greater weight of these fastgrowing economies in the world economy, their distinct
growth advantage over advanced economies looks likely
to continue unless advanced economies can meet their
structural economic challenges.
The Asian crisis and the dot-com collapse—and
intervening events like the forced bailout of Long-Term
Capital Management (LTCM) in 1998, which avoided
a possible systemic financial meltdown—illustrate
International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

xiii

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

pointedly how balance-sheet weaknesses and asset-price
bubbles can bring down financial institutions and entire
economies. In his 1998 Henry L. Stimson Lecture at
Yale University, Alexandre Lamfalussy wrote presciently
of the US market turmoil that followed that year’s Russian default: “If such developments can take place in the
model market of the world, what is the practical value of
recommending that emerging markets copy this model?”
Many emerging market and developing economies
did draw and act on lessons from these crises, for
example, by embracing inflation targeting, adopting
more flexible exchange rate regimes, and implementing macroprudential policies—lessons well worth
remembering today. Advanced economies, however,
were more complacent, often viewing financial crises
as problems to which only emerging market and
developing economies were susceptible—notwithstanding the contradictory evidence from several nearmisses, including LTCM. The result was the global
financial crisis, which ended the mid-decade global
boom. As a group, emerging market and developing
economies generally weathered that crisis well, given
its severity, and they have continued to grow more
quickly than during the 1980s and 1990s.

The Postcrisis Decade
World growth took a rarely precedented tumble in
2009, but all regions of the world experienced a bounce
back in 2010–11, supported by vigorous countercyclical responses throughout the Group of Twenty countries. Many advanced economies reduced policy interest
rates to the zero lower bound and began to experiment
with unconventional monetary policies.
After 2010–11, however, a succession of shocks—
the euro area crisis, reversals of fiscal stimulus in
major economies, wobbles in Chinese growth, and
falling commodity prices—all prevented continued
strong and synchronized growth. Relatively favorable
economic fundamentals in the United States made
it likely that the Federal Reserve would be the first
among major central banks to normalize monetary
policy, and the dollar strengthened starting in the
summer of 2014. Global markets were spooked a year
later when China, feeling the resulting pressure on
its heavily managed exchange rate, began to allow its
currency to fall against the dollar. The tensions did
not recede quickly. Within a month of the Federal
Reserve’s first interest-rate hike in nearly 10 years at
the end of 2015, global financial markets swooned
xiv

and commodity prices fell further. The 2016 global
growth rate of 3.3 percent was the lowest since 2009.
Economic optimism began to return midway
through 2016, despite any effects from the surprise outcome of the UK Brexit referendum in June. Late that
year, manufacturing activity surged and growth picked
up broadly around the world, leading to the most
evenly balanced global upswing since 2010. Global
trade, which had grown unusually slowly during 2012–
16, also rebounded as investment began to recover. As
of the April 2018 WEO, we projected global growth
to rise to 3.9 percent in both 2018 and 2019, and for
the first time in a while, assessed short-term risks to our
growth forecast to be evenly balanced between potential
positive and negative surprises.
Now, in October 2018, the outlook is one of less
balanced and more tentative expansion than we hoped
for last April. Growth in the United States remains
exceptionally robust for now, powered by a procyclical
fiscal expansion that may, however, weigh on US and
global growth later. But we have downgraded near-term
growth prospects for the euro area, Korea, and the
United Kingdom. Our reassessment is more dramatic
for emerging markets as a group, where we see growth
easing in Latin America (notably Argentina, Brazil,
Mexico), the Middle East (notably Iran), and emerging
Europe (notably Turkey). Our 2019 growth projection
for China is also lower than in April, given the latest
round of US tariffs on Chinese imports, as are our projections for India. Owing to these changes, our international growth projections for both this year and next
are downgraded to 3.7 percent, 0.2 percentage point
below our last assessments and the same rate achieved
in 2017. At the global level, recent data show weakening in trade, manufacturing, and investment. Overall,
world economic growth is still solid compared with
earlier this decade, but it appears to have plateaued.
These more moderate growth numbers and the
weaker incoming data that underpin them owe, in
part, to a sharp rise in policy uncertainty over the past
year—a development yet to be reflected in advanced
economy financial markets but evident in news-based
uncertainty measures. Uncertainty over trade policy is
prominent in the wake of US actions (or threatened
actions) on several fronts, the responses by its trading
partners, and a general weakening of multilateral
consultation on trade issues. The possible failure of
Brexit negotiations poses another risk. Amid the trade
uncertainties, financial conditions are tightening for
emerging market and developing economies as they

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

FOREWORD

adjust to progressive interest rate hikes by the Federal
Reserve and an impending end of asset purchases
by the European Central Bank. Compared with 10
years ago, many of these economies have higher levels
of corporate and sovereign debt, leaving them more
vulnerable. With geopolitical tensions also relevant
in several regions, we judge that, even for the near
future, the possibility of unpleasant surprises outweighs the likelihood of unforeseen good news.

Policy Challenges
Perhaps the biggest secular challenge for many
advanced economies centers on the slow growth of
workers’ incomes, perceptions of lower social mobility,
and, in some countries, inadequate policy responses to
structural economic change. Not only has the trend in
long-term advanced economy growth been downward;
in many countries, the more meager gains have gone
primarily to the relatively well-off. In the United
States, for example, median real household income
was about the same in 2016 as in 1999. This pattern clearly predates the global financial crisis and the
euro area crisis. But the crises themselves, along with
aspects of the policy response, further soured the public mood. Such discontent in turn helped give rise to
current tensions over trade policy as well as a broader
skepticism toward centrist policies and leaders, who
have traditionally supported global cooperation as the
proper response to shared challenges.
Policymakers must take a long-term perspective to
address this malaise. Inclusive fiscal policies, educational
investments, and ensuring access to adequate health
care can reduce inequality and are key priorities. So too
are more secure social safety nets that can help workers adjust to a range of structural shocks, whether from
globalization, technological change, or (in some countries) climate change. Policies to promote labor force
participation and the economic inclusion of women
and youth are especially important. Structural reform
priorities differ by country, but in general, addressing
them will raise output and growth over the medium
term. That said, due consideration must be given to
those who are already disadvantaged but might lose
out further. Support for research and development and
basic and applied scientific research offers the promise
of raising growth rates, as many studies have shown.
These policy priorities are also relevant to emerging
market and developing economies.
Most countries also need to build fiscal buffers to
make room for policy responses to the next recession

when it comes and to reduce the long-term tax costs of
servicing high public debts. Several emerging market and developing economies must undertake fiscal
reforms to ensure the sustainability of public finances
and improve market sentiment. Global and national
actions have buttressed financial stability since the crisis, but the work remains incomplete in several respects,
including, for example, safeguarding the nonbank
financial sector and resolution in insolvency, especially
for systemically important international banks, where a
cooperative global framework is urgently needed. Some
financial oversight measures that grew out of the crisis
could be simplified, but a wholesale rollback would risk
future instability. Even piecemeal deregulation must be
cautious and carefully considered, because a sequence
of smaller actions could eventually weaken the system
enough to leave it fragile. Indeed, precisely because
monetary policy will need to remain accommodative
where inflation is below target levels and will need
to proceed cautiously elsewhere, effective macro- and
microprudential levers must remain available.
The growing weight of emerging market and
developing economies in the global economy means
that advanced economies internalize fewer of the
global gains from their own support of multilateral
cooperation. They perceive the leakage of benefits
to other countries to be relatively larger now than
in the past, compared with their own benefits. This
change may tempt some to retreat into an imagined
self-​sufficiency. But economic interdependence is
greater than ever—through trade, finance, knowledge
spillovers, migration, and environmental impacts, to
name a few channels—and that makes cooperation in
areas of common concern more important than ever
too, including for advanced economies.
Multilateralism must evolve so that every country
views it to be in its self-interest, even in a multipolar
world. But that will require domestic political support for
an internationally collaborative approach. Inclusive policies that ensure a broad sharing of the gains from economic growth are not only desirable in their own right;
they can also help convince citizens that international
cooperation works for them. I am proud that during
my tenure, the IMF has increasingly championed such
policies while supporting multilateral solutions to global
challenges. Without more inclusive policies, multilateralism cannot survive. And without multilateralism, the
world will be a poorer and more dangerous place.
Maurice Obstfeld
Economic Counsellor
International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

xv

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The steady expansion under way since mid-2016
continues, with global growth for 2018–19 projected
to remain at its 2017 level. At the same time, however,
the expansion has become less balanced and may have
peaked in some major economies. Downside risks to
global growth have risen in the past six months and the
potential for upside surprises has receded.
Global growth is projected at 3.7 percent for 2018–
19—0.2 percentage point lower for both years than
forecast in April. In the United States, momentum is still
strong as fiscal stimulus continues to increase, but the
forecast for 2019 has been revised down due to recently
announced trade measures, including the tariffs imposed
on $200 billion of US imports from China. Growth
projections have been marked down for the euro area and
the United Kingdom, following surprises that suppressed
activity in early 2018. Among emerging market and
developing economies, the growth prospects of many energy
exporters have been lifted by higher oil prices, but growth
was revised down for Argentina, Brazil, Iran, and Turkey,
among others, reflecting country-specific factors, tighter
financial conditions, geopolitical tensions, and higher oil
import bills. China and a number of Asian economies are
also projected to experience somewhat weaker growth in
2019 in the aftermath of the recently announced trade
measures. Beyond the next couple of years, as output gaps
close and monetary policy settings continue to normalize, growth in most advanced economies is expected to
decline to potential rates—well below the averages reached
before the global financial crisis of a decade ago. Slower
expansion in working-age populations and projected
lackluster productivity gains are the prime drivers of lower
medium-term growth rates. US growth will decline as
fiscal stimulus begins to unwind in 2020, at a time when
the monetary tightening cycle is expected to be at its peak.
Growth in China will remain strong but is projected to
decline gradually, and prospects remain subpar in some
emerging market and developing economies, especially for
per capita growth, including in commodity exporters that
continue to face substantial fiscal consolidation needs or
are mired in war and conflict.
Risks to global growth skew to the downside in a context
of elevated policy uncertainty. Several of the downside

xvi

risks highlighted in the April 2018 World Economic
Outlook (WEO)—such as rising trade barriers and a
reversal of capital flows to emerging market economies
with weaker fundamentals and higher political risk—have
become more pronounced or have partially materialized.
While financial market conditions remain accommodative in advanced economies, they could tighten rapidly if,
for example, trade tensions and policy uncertainty were
to intensify. Monetary policy is another potential trigger.
The US economy is above full employment, yet the path of
interest rate increases that markets anticipate is less steep
than that projected by the Federal Reserve. Unexpectedly
high inflation readings in the United States could therefore
lead investors to abruptly reassess risks. Tighter financial
conditions in advanced economies could cause disruptive
portfolio adjustments, sharp exchange rate movements, and
further reductions in capital inflows to emerging markets,
particularly those with greater vulnerabilities.
The recovery has helped lift employment and income,
strengthened balance sheets, and provided an opportunity to rebuild buffers. Yet, with risks shifting to the
downside, there is greater urgency for policies to enhance
prospects for strong and inclusive growth. Avoiding
protectionist reactions to structural change and finding
cooperative solutions that promote continued growth in
goods and services trade remain essential to preserve and
extend the global expansion. At a time of above-potential growth in many economies, policy­makers should aim
to enact reforms that raise medium-term incomes to the
benefit of all. With shrinking excess capacity and mounting downside risks, many countries need to rebuild fiscal
buffers and strengthen their resilience to an environment
in which financial conditions could tighten suddenly
and sharply.
In advanced economies, economic activity lost
some momentum in the first half of 2018 after peaking in the second half of 2017. Outcomes fell short of
projections in the euro area and the United Kingdom;
growth in world trade and industrial production
declined; and some high-frequency indicators moderated. Core inflation remains very different across
advanced economies—well below objectives in the
euro area and Japan, but close to target in the United

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

Executive Summary

Kingdom and the United States. Across emerging
market and developing economies, activity continued
to improve gradually in energy exporters but softened
in some importers. Activity slowed more markedly in
Argentina, Brazil, and Turkey, where country-specific
factors and a souring of investor sentiment were also at
play. Inflation has generally increased in emerging market and developing economies, in part reflecting the
pass-through of currency depreciations. While financial
conditions have tightened in many emerging market
and developing economies, they remain supportive in
advanced economies, despite continued federal funds
rate increases in the United States.
Global growth is forecast at 3.7 percent for 2018–
19, 0.2 percentage point below the April 2018 WEO
projection, and is set to soften over the medium term.
Global financial conditions are expected to tighten
as monetary policy normalizes; the trade measures
implemented since April will weigh on activity in 2019
and beyond; US fiscal policy will subtract momentum
starting in 2020; and China will slow, reflecting weaker
credit growth and rising trade barriers. In advanced
economies, marked slowdowns in working-age population growth and lackluster productivity advances will
hold back gains in medium-term potential output.
Across emerging market and developing economies,
medium-term prospects are mixed. Projections remain
favorable for emerging Asia and emerging Europe,
excluding Turkey, but are tepid for Latin America, the
Middle East, and sub-Saharan Africa, where—despite
the ongoing recovery—the medium-term outlook for
commodity exporters remains generally subdued, with
a need for further economic diversification and fiscal
adjustment. Prospects for 2018–19 were marked down
sharply for Iran, reflecting the impact of the reinstatement of US sanctions. For Turkey, market turmoil,
sharp currency depreciation, and elevated uncertainty
will weigh on investment and consumer demand,
likewise justifying a sharp negative revision in growth
prospects. Growth for China and a number of Asian
economies have also been revised down following the
recently announced trade measures. Some 45 emerging market and developing economies—accounting for
10 percent of world GDP in purchasing-power-parity
terms—are projected to grow by less than advanced
economies in per capita terms over 2018–23, and
hence to fall further behind in living standards.
The balance of risks to the global growth forecast
is tilted to the downside, both in the short term and

beyond. The potential for upside surprises has ebbed,
given diminished growth momentum and tighter
financial conditions in emerging market and developing
economies. At the same time, several of the downside
risks highlighted in the April 2018 WEO—such as
rising trade barriers and a reversal of capital flows to
emerging market economies with weaker external positions, such as Argentina and Turkey—have become
more pronounced or have partially materialized.
Escalating trade tensions and the potential shift away
from a multilateral, rules-based trading system are key
threats to the global outlook. Since the April 2018
WEO, protectionist rhetoric has increasingly turned
into action, with the United States imposing tariffs on a
variety of imports, including on $200 billion of imports
from China, and trading partners undertaking or
promising retaliatory and other protective measures. An
intensification of trade tensions, and the associated rise
in policy uncertainty, could dent business and financial
market sentiment, trigger financial market volatility,
and slow investment and trade. Higher trade barriers
would disrupt global supply chains and slow the spread
of new technologies, ultimately lowering global productivity and welfare. More import restrictions would also
make tradable consumer goods less affordable, harming
low-income households disproportionately.
Still-easy global financial conditions could tighten
sharply, triggered by more aggressive monetary policy
tightening in advanced economies or the materialization of other risks that shift market sentiment. Such
developments would expose vulnerabilities that have
accumulated over the years, dent confidence, and
undermine investment (a key driver of the baseline
growth forecast). In the medium term, risks stem from
a potential continued buildup of financial vulnerabilities, the implementation of unsustainable macroeconomic policies amid a subdued growth outlook, rising
inequality, and declining trust in mainstream economic
policies. A range of other noneconomic risks are also
relevant. If any of these risks materializes, the likelihood of other adverse developments will rise.
The environment of continued expansion offers a
narrowing window of opportunity to advance policies
and reforms—both multilaterally and at the country
level—that extend the momentum and raise mediumterm growth for the benefit of all, while building buffers for the next downturn and strengthening resilience
to an environment where financial conditions could
tighten suddenly and sharply.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

xvii

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Foster cooperation. Countries need to work together
to tackle challenges that extend beyond their own
borders. To preserve and broaden the gains from
decades of rules-based global trade integration, countries should cooperate to reduce trade costs further
and resolve disagreements without raising distortionary barriers. Cooperative efforts are also essential for
completing the financial regulatory reform agenda,
strengthening international taxation, enhancing
cybersecurity, tackling corruption, and mitigating and
coping with climate change.
Bring inflation to target, build buffers, curb excess
imbalances. Monetary accommodation needs to
continue where inflation is weak, but cautious, wellcommunicated, data-dependent normalization should
proceed where inflation is close to target. Fiscal policy
should aim to rebuild buffers for the next downturn,
and the composition of public spending and revenues
should be designed to bolster potential output and
inclusiveness. In countries at or close to full employment, with an excess current account deficit and an
unsustainable fiscal position (notably the United
States), public debt needs to be stabilized and eventually reduced, and procyclical stimulus, which is
contributing to rising global imbalances and heightened risks to the US and global economies, should be
withdrawn. Countries with both excess current account
surpluses and fiscal space (for example, Germany)
should increase public investment to boost potential
growth and reduce external imbalances.
Strengthen the potential for higher and more inclusive
growth. All countries should grasp the opportunity to
adopt structural reforms and policies that raise productivity and ensure broad-based gains—for instance,
by encouraging technological innovation and diffusion, increasing labor force participation (especially
by women and youth), supporting those displaced
by structural change, and investing in education and
training to enhance job opportunities.

xviii

Build resilience. Macro- and microprudential policies
face the challenges of building financial buffers, curtailing rising leverage, limiting excessive risk taking, and
containing financial stability risks (including threats to
cybersecurity). In the euro area, balance sheet repair
needs to continue. Emerging market economies should
aim to keep contingent liabilities and balance sheet
mismatches in check. Building on recent efforts, China
should continue to rein in credit growth and address
financial risks, even if growth temporarily slows. Among
the main findings of Chapter 2 is that countries with
stronger fiscal positions before the global financial crisis,
and those with more flexible exchange rate regimes,
experienced smaller output losses. Underscoring the
importance of macroprudential policies and effective
supervision, countries with greater financial vulnerabilities before the global financial crisis suffered larger output
losses. The analysis in Chapter 3 highlights important
ways in which emerging market and developing economies can reap the benefits from stronger institutions. In
the current juncture where global financial conditions are
normalizing, more credible monetary policy frameworks
that effectively anchor inflation expectations can make
the economy more resilient to adverse external shocks by
improving the tradeoff between inflation and output.
Improve convergence prospects for low-income developing countries. Continued progress toward the 2030
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals is
imperative to foster greater economic security and
better living standards for a rising share of the world’s
population. Given their generally high levels of public
indebtedness, low-income developing countries need
to make decisive progress to strengthen their fiscal
positions while prioritizing well-targeted measures to
reduce poverty. They must also boost the resilience of
their financial systems. Investing in human capital,
improving access to credit, and reducing infrastructure gaps can promote economic diversification and
improve the capacity to cope with climate shocks.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER

1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Global growth for 2018–19 is projected to remain
steady at its 2017 level, but its pace is less vigorous
than projected in April and it has become less balanced.
Downside risks to global growth have risen in the past six
months and the potential for upside surprises has receded.
Global growth is projected at 3.7 percent for
2018–19—0.2 percentage point lower for both years
than forecast in April. The downward revision reflects
surprises that suppressed activity in early 2018 in some
major advanced economies, the negative effects of the
trade measures implemented or approved between April
and mid-September, as well as a weaker outlook for some
key emerging market and developing economies arising
from country-specific factors, tighter financial conditions,
geopolitical tensions, and higher oil import bills. Beyond
the next couple of years, as output gaps close and monetary policy settings begin to normalize, growth in most
advanced economies is expected to decline to potential
rates well below the averages reached before the global
financial crisis of a decade ago. Medium-term prospects
remain generally strong in emerging Asia but subpar
in some emerging market and developing economies,
especially for per capita growth, including in commodity
exporters that continue to face substantial fiscal consolidation needs or are mired in war and conflict.
The balance of risks to the global growth forecast has
shifted to the downside in a context of elevated policy
uncertainty. Several of the downside risks highlighted in
the April 2018 World Economic Outlook (WEO)—such
as rising trade barriers and a reversal of capital flows to
emerging market economies with weaker fundamentals
and higher political risk—have become more pronounced
or have partially materialized. Meanwhile, the potential
for upside surprises has receded, given the tightening of
financial conditions in some parts of the world, higher trade
costs, slow implementation of reforms recommended in the
past, and waning growth momentum. While financial
market conditions remain accommodative in advanced
economies, they could tighten rapidly if trade tensions and
policy uncertainty intensify, or unexpectedly high inflation
in the United States triggers a stronger-than-anticipated
monetary policy response. Tighter financial conditions

in advanced economies could cause disruptive portfolio adjustments, sharp exchange rate movements, and
further reductions in capital inflows to emerging markets, particularly those with greater vulnerabilities.
The recovery has helped lift employment and income,
has strengthened balance sheets, and has provided an
opportunity to rebuild buffers. However, with risks
shifting to the downside, there is greater urgency for
policies to enhance prospects for strong and inclusive
growth. Avoiding protectionist reactions to structural
change and finding cooperative solutions that promote
continued growth in goods and services trade remain
essential to preserving and extending the global expansion. At a time of above-potential growth in many
economies, policymakers should aim to enact reforms
that raise medium-term incomes for the benefit of all.
With shrinking excess capacity and mounting downside
risks, many countries need to rebuild fiscal buffers and
strengthen their resilience to an environment in which
financial conditions could tighten suddenly and sharply.

Recent Developments and Prospects
Softer, More Uneven Momentum
In the first half of 2018, global growth shed some
of the strong momentum registered in the second half
of last year, and the expansion became less synchronized across countries. Activity moderated more than
expected in some large advanced economies from its
strong pace last year, while the emerging market and
developing economy group continued to expand at
broadly the same pace as in 2017 (Figure 1.1).
Among advanced economies, growth disappointed
in the euro area and the United Kingdom. Slower
export growth after a strong surge in the final quarter
of 2017 contributed notably to the euro area slowdown. Higher energy prices helped dampen demand
in energy importers, while some countries were also
affected by political uncertainty or industrial actions.
In the United Kingdom, growth moderated more
than anticipated, partly because of weather-related

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

1

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 1.1. Global Activity Indicators
Global growth moderated in the ﬁrst half of 2018, with negative surprises to
activity in several large advanced economies. After rapid growth in 2017, world
trade volumes and industrial production have slowed, and some high-frequency
indicators have softened.
112 1. World Trade and Industrial Production
(Index, 2015 = 100)
108

Industrial production
World trade volumes

104
100
96

2015

16

14 2. Manufacturing PMI
(Three-month moving
12
average; deviations
10
from 50)
World
Advanced economies1
8
Emerging market
6
economies2
4
2
0
–2
–4
2012 13 14 15 16 17 Aug.
18

17

Jul.
18

3. Consumer Conﬁdence
(Index, 2010 = 100)

130

Advanced economies1
Emerging market
economies2
World

125
120
115
110
105
100
95

90
2012 13 14 15 16 17 Aug.
18

GDP Growth
(Annualized semiannual percent change)
April 2018 WEO

October 2018 WEO

4 4. Advanced Economies

5. Emerging Market and
Developing Economies

3

8

6
5

1
0
2011:
H1

9

7

2

4
13:
H1

15:
H1

17:
H1

19:
H2

2011:
H1

13:
H1

15:
H1

17:
H1

3
19:
H2

Sources: CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis; Haver Analytics;
Markit Economics; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: CC = consumer conﬁdence; PMI = purchasing managers’ index;
WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1
Australia, Canada (PMI only), Czech Republic, Denmark, euro area, Hong Kong
SAR (CC only), Israel, Japan, Korea, New Zealand (PMI only), Norway (CC only),
Singapore (PMI only), Sweden (CC only), Switzerland, Taiwan Province of China,
United Kingdom, United States.
2
Argentina (CC only), Brazil, China, Colombia (CC only), Hungary, India (PMI only),
Indonesia, Latvia (CC only), Malaysia (PMI only), Mexico (PMI only), Philippines (CC
only), Poland, Russia, South Africa, Thailand (CC only), Turkey, Ukraine (CC only).

2

disruptions in the first quarter. Set against these
developments, the US economy maintained robust
growth, particularly in the second quarter, with
private sector activity buoyed further by sizable fiscal stimulus.
Aggregate growth in the emerging market and
developing economy group stabilized in the first half
of 2018. Emerging Asia continued to register strong
growth, supported by a domestic demand-led pickup
in the Indian economy from a four-year-low pace of
expansion in 2017, even as activity in China moderated in the second quarter in response to regulatory
tightening of the property sector and nonbank financial intermediation. Higher oil prices lifted growth
among fuel-exporting economies in sub-Saharan Africa
and the Middle East. The recovery in Latin America
continued, though at a more subdued pace than anticipated as tighter financial conditions and a drought
weighed on growth in Argentina and a nationwide
truckers’ strike disrupted production in Brazil.

Trade Tensions
Since January, a sequence of US tariff actions on
solar panels, washing machines, steel, aluminum, and a
range of Chinese products, plus retaliation by trading
partners has complicated global trade relations.1 While
the preliminary agreement between the United States
and Mexico on some bilateral trade issues has been a
step forward, the future of the trilateral North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) remains uncertain as the United States and Canada work to resolve
remaining issues. Moreover, the potential for escalating
trade tensions looms.2
Although sentiment has generally remained strong
despite the intensification of trade disputes, and
headline high-frequency data point to continued
momentum, some of the more trade-sensitive data
1Following

tariff increases in early 2018 on washing machines,
solar cells, steel, and aluminum, the United States on June 15
announced a 25 percent tariff on imports from China worth $50 billion; China announced retaliation on a similar scale. On September
17, the United States announced a 10 percent tariff—rising to
25 percent by year end—on an additional $200 billion in imports
from China. In response, China, announced tariffs on a further
$60 billion of US imports.
2The United States has also suggested that a further $267 billion of Chinese goods—covering nearly all remaining Chinese
imports—may be hit with tariffs, and it has separately raised the
possibility of tariffs on the automotive sector that would affect many
other countries (see Scenario Box 1).

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Figure 1.2. Commodity and Oil Prices

Commodity Index Rising on Higher Energy Prices

(Deﬂated using US consumer price index; index, 2014 = 100)
The commodity price index has risen in the past six months, driven by higher
energy prices. Food prices fell amid rising trade tensions, while the price of metals
softened because of weaker demand from China.
180
Average petroleum spot price
Food
Metals
All commodities

160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

2011

12

13

14

15

16

17

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

18

19

Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; and IMF staff estimates.

have weakened since the start of the year. Surveys of
purchasing managers in China, the euro area, Japan,
and the United States point to softer growth in export
orders. Sector-specific sentiment indicators for automakers in Germany and Japan suggest more pessimism about the outlook than at the start of the year.
Industrial production subindices for the United States,
Japan, and Germany indicate greater moderation in
capital-goods-producing sectors than for the rest of
manufacturing, which could signal weaker capital
spending. German manufacturing orders fell by about
4 percent on a monthly basis in June (contributing to
a 6½ percent drop in the second quarter on a quarterly, annualized basis) followed by a close to 1 percent
decline in July. Consistent with the evidence from the
production side, international trade in goods appears
to have slowed since early 2018 after very rapid growth
late in 2017 (Figure 1.1). Growth in import volumes
in some of the main advanced economies (United
States, euro area, Japan) has declined. The trade
slowdown could reflect a combination of factors, such
as some payback from the very strong trade growth
in late 2017 and weaker capital spending in a more
uncertain global environment.

The IMF’s Primary Commodities Price Index
rose 3.3 percent between February 2018 and August
2018—that is, between the reference periods for the
April 2018 and the current WEO—driven by higher
energy prices (Figure 1.2). As discussed in the Commodities Special Feature, the energy subindex rose
11.1 percent. Food prices were down 6.4 percent, and
the metals subindex declined 11.7 percent.
Oil prices rose to more than $76 a barrel in June—
the highest level since November 2014—reflecting the
collapse in Venezuela’s production, unexpected outages
in Canada and Libya, and expectations of lower Iranian exports following US sanctions. Prices dropped to
about $71 a barrel by August following a decision by
the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and the non-OPEC oil exporters (including Russia) to increase oil production. The coal price
index—an average of Australian and South African
prices—increased 9.8 percent from February 2018 to
August 2018, reflecting tight supply conditions. Strong
demand for liquefied natural gas in China and India as
well as higher oil prices kept the spot price for liquefied natural gas close to its highest level in three years.
The decline in the IMF’s agricultural price index
between the reference periods reflects, to a large extent,
trade tensions and concerns about global growth.
Moreover, weather-related supply shortfalls of cocoa,
cotton, and wheat are smaller than previously anticipated. Among commodities affected by trade tensions,
soybean prices fell in June as China announced retaliatory import tariffs on US soybeans.
The softening of metals prices between February
and August 2018 was largely due to weaker demand
from China. Metals markets also experienced high
volatility, reflecting, in part, implemented tariff actions,
US sanctions on aluminum giant Rusal, and higher
trade policy uncertainty. The price of iron ore, the
primary input in steel manufacture, dropped 12.4 percent between the reference periods. Aluminum prices
reached a seven-year high in May after the Rusal sanctions, before declining more than 10 percent in June
and July as tariff hikes were implemented.

Rising Headline Inflation, but Core Remains Subdued
Higher energy prices have lifted headline
year-over-year inflation rates in advanced and emerging
market and developing economies over the past six

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

3

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 1.3. Global Inﬂation

(Three-month moving average; annualized percent change, unless noted
otherwise)
Higher fuel prices have lifted headline inﬂation over the past six months, and, in
emerging market and developing economies, core inﬂation has also inched up. Wage
growth, however, remains muted despite continued declines in unemployment rates.
Consumer price inﬂation

Core consumer price inﬂation

3 1. Advanced Economies

2. Emerging Market and
Developing Economies

2

7
6

1

5

0

4

–1

3

–2

2013 14

15

16

17

Jul.
18

2013

20 3. Producer Price Inﬂation1
World
EMDEs

15
10

AEs

0
–5
2013 14

15

16

17

15

16

17

Jul.
18

5 5. Unemployment Rate and Wage Growth in AEs3
(Percent)
Unemployment rate (inverted, right scale)
4
Wage rate (two-quarter moving average;
percent change from a year ago)
3

3
4
5
6
7

2
1

2
Jul.
18

3.8
2.2 4. Consumer Price
Inﬂation Expectations
2.1
(Percent)
2.0
3.6
1.9
1.8
3.4
1.7
AEs2
1.6
3.2
EMDEs (right scale)
1.5
1.4
3.0
2016
17
Aug.
18

5

–10

14

8

2005 06

07

08

09

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

9
17 May.
18

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development; US Bureau of Labor Statistics; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies (AUT, BEL, CAN, CHE, CZE, DEU, DNK, ESP, EST,
FIN, FRA, GBR, GRC, HKG, IRL, ISR, ITA, JPN, KOR, LTU, LUX, LVA, NLD, NOR, PRT,
SGP, SVK, SVN, SWE, TWN, USA); EMDEs = emerging market and developing
economies (BGR, BRA, CHL, CHN, COL, HUN, IDN, IND, MEX, MYS, PER, PHL, POL,
ROU, RUS, THA, TUR, ZAF). Country list uses International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) country codes.
1
AEs exclude HKG, ISR, and TWN. EMDEs include UKR; exclude IDN, IND, PER, and
PHL.
2
AEs include AUS; exclude LUX.
3
Blue line includes AUS and NZL; excludes BEL. Red line includes AUS and MLT;
excludes HKG, SGP, and TWN.

4

months. Core inflation—that is, excluding food and
energy—remains below central banks’ targets in most
advanced economies. Among emerging market and
developing economies, excluding Venezuela’s hyperinflation, core inflation remains below the average
of recent years but has inched up in recent months
(Figure 1.3).
Among advanced economies, core annual consumer
price inflation in the United States, where unemployment hovers around multidecade lows, has exceeded
2 percent since March. The Federal Reserve’s preferred
price index of personal consumption expenditure has
also risen close to the target 2 percent. Core inflation
in the United Kingdom averaged slightly more than
2 percent in the first half of 2018, lower than last
year, as the effects of the large sterling depreciation
of 2016–17 on domestic prices have gradually faded.
In the euro area and Japan, core inflation remains
weak at about 1 percent in the euro area and 0.3 percent in Japan.3
Real wage growth in most advanced economies
remains muted, even as labor markets tighten and
output gaps close (and, in some cases, as the gap turns
positive with the economy operating above potential).
In the United States and Japan, for example, where
unemployment rates are the lowest since 2000 and
1993, respectively, wages have risen only moderately,
reflecting, in part, weak productivity growth and
possibly greater labor market slack than reflected in
headline unemployment numbers.
In the emerging market and developing economy
group, core inflation remains contained at about 2 percent in China, where domestic demand has slowed in
response to financial regulatory tightening. In India,
core inflation (excluding all food and energy items)
has risen to about 6 percent as a result of a narrowing output gap and pass-through effects from higher
energy prices and exchange rate depreciation. Core
inflation has declined in Brazil and Mexico (to about
2½ percent and 3½ percent, respectively), reflecting
moderations in activity and improved anchoring of
expectations. In Russia, core inflation dropped this
year (averaging less than 2 percent until May, and rising slightly in June), consistent with moderately tight
monetary policy, declining inflation expectations, and
low exchange rate pass-through.

3For Japan, the core consumer price index excludes fresh
food and energy.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Financial Conditions Marginally Tighter,
Localized Pressures
As discussed in the October 2018 Global Financial
Stability Report (GFSR), global financial conditions
have marginally tightened over the past six months.
Although they remain accommodative and generally
supportive of growth, significant differences have
emerged between advanced and emerging market
economies. In advanced economies, after spiking in
the early months of the year, market volatility has
subsided and risk appetite remains relatively strong.
The widening growth differential between the United
States and other advanced economies, together with
associated divergences in monetary policy stances
and long-term yields, have contributed to US dollar
appreciation since April. Against this backdrop, localized pressure points have emerged in countries with
weaker macroeconomic fundamentals and greater
political uncertainty. The financial market impact of
trade tensions has so far been contained to specific
sectors, such as automobiles and aluminum, and
some trade-sensitive currencies.
As expected by markets, the Federal Reserve
raised the target range of the federal funds rate to
1.75–2 percent in June. With economic expansion in
the United States gaining momentum, and a sizable
fiscal stimulus anticipated to amplify already-buoyant
private sector activity, the Federal Reserve signaled
two additional rate hikes in 2018 and three in 2019.
Also, in June, the European Central Bank announced
an extension of its asset purchase program through
the end of the year, while indicating it would reduce
monthly purchases from €30 billion to €15 billion in
October. The central bank also committed to maintaining rates at current levels at least through the
summer of 2019. In July the Bank of Japan modified
its yield curve control policy to allow a wider deviation band for the benchmark 10-year yield around
an unchanged target of about zero percent. The Bank
of Japan also introduced forward guidance on maintaining ultralow policy rates for an extended period of
time. Among other advanced economies, the Bank of
Canada raised its policy rate by 25 basis points in July,
as did the Bank of England in August (marking only
its second rate hike in a decade).
Long-term bond yields have diverged among
advanced economies since February–March (Figure 1.4). As of mid-September, the 10-year US
Treasury yield has risen to about 3.0 percent, while
yields on German 10-year bunds have dropped 25

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

basis points to 0.45 percent and yields on UK gilts
have remained at about 1.5 percent. Italian sovereign
spreads have widened considerably since late May,
initially owing to difficulties in the formation of a
government and, more recently, because of uncertainty
about the forthcoming budget. As of mid-September,
they stood at about 250 basis points. In contrast, other
euro area sovereign spreads have remained compressed.
Corporate spreads have increased slightly since April,
particularly among non-investment-grade credits
(Figure 1.4, panel 4). With advanced economies’
corporate profits remaining generally healthy, equity
indices in the United States are slightly higher. Elsewhere, they are at broadly the same level (Figure 1.4,
panel 5). As noted in the October 2018 GFSR, US
equity prices now appear modestly higher than their
model-based values, based on alternative measures of
S&P 500 earnings expectations as well as proxies for
both the discount factor and the equity risk premium.
Price-to-earnings ratios are little changed relative to
April (Figure 1.4, panel 6).
As of mid-September, the US dollar has strengthened by about 6½ percent in real effective terms since
February (the reference period for the April 2018
WEO), consistent with the widening interest rate and
expected growth differentials (Figure 1.5, panel 1). The
euro, the yen, and the pound sterling have weakened
vis-à-vis the US dollar but remain broadly unchanged
in real effective terms, reflecting the depreciation of
emerging market currencies discussed below.
Among emerging market economies, Argentina
and Turkey have come under severe market pressure
in recent weeks. In Argentina, tighter global financial conditions, together with a domestic corruption
scandal and persistent uncertainty over the success of
the stabilization plan underlying the program with the
IMF, have contributed to financial market volatility.
Despite a 2,000-basis-point hike in the short-term
policy rate and several increases of reserve requirements, the Argentinean peso depreciated by over
40 percent in real effective terms between February
and mid-September, equity valuations fell further,
and sovereign spreads rose to above 700 basis points.
In Turkey, concerns about underlying fundamentals
and political tensions with the United States triggered a sharp depreciation of the currency (27 percent between February and mid-September in real
effective terms), declining asset prices, and widening
spreads. In response, the authorities released some
foreign exchange liquidity by lowering reserve requireInternational Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

5

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 1.4. Advanced Economies: Monetary and Financial
Market Conditions

Figure 1.5. Real Effective Exchange Rate Changes,
February–September 2018

Despite monetary policy tightening in the United States, ﬁnancial conditions
remain generally supportive of growth in advanced economies. Since earlier this
year, long-term government bond yields have diverged: a steeper path of expected
policy rates has modestly lifted US 10-year government bond yields, while yields
on German and UK long-term bonds have fallen.

The US dollar has appreciated in real effective terms by about 6.5 percent since
February on the back of widening interest rate and growth differentials. Emerging
market currencies have generally weakened, with very large depreciations in
Turkey and Argentina on growing concerns about macroeconomic imbalances and
a notable weakening of the South African rand—after its strong rally in previous
months—and of the Brazilian real.

(Percent, unless noted otherwise)

2. Policy Rate Expectations1
(Percent; dashed lines are
from the April 2018 WEO)

3.0 1. US Policy Rate
Expectations1
2.5
2.0

1.0

5
4
3

2017

18

19

20

5
4
3

2018

19

20

4. Credit Spreads2
(Basis points)

3. Ten-Year Government Bond
Yields2
Japan
(Percent)
United States
United Kingdom
Germany
Italy

US high yield

4

1

2

–2

1,000

–6

0

200

Euro high grade
17

Sep.
18

200 5. Equity Markets
(Index, 2007 = 100)
180
160
S&P 500
140
120
100
80
60
MSCI Emerging Market
40
Euro Stoxx
20
TOPIX
0
2013 14 15 16 17 Aug.
18

2013 14

15

16

17

USA

EA

JPN GBR SWE CHE KOR TWN SGP CAN NOR AUS NZL

6. Price-to-Earnings Ratios2
United States
Japan
Germany
Italy

0
–10
–20
–30

0
Sep.
18

–40
35
30
25
20

–50

ZAF

IND
CHN

MYS
IDN

THA
PHL

POL
HUN

TUR
RUS

BRA
ARG

COL
CHL

PER
MEX

2013 14

15

16

17

10
Sep.
18

PAK

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: EA = euro area. Data labels use International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) country codes. Latest data available are for September 14,
2018.

15

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Thomson Reuters Datastream; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: MSCI = Morgan Stanley Capital International; S&P = Standard & Poor’s;
TOPIX = Tokyo Stock Price Index; WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1
Expectations are based on the federal funds rate futures for the United States, the
sterling overnight interbank average rate for the United Kingdom, and the euro
interbank offered forward rate for the euro area; updated September 17, 2018.
2
Data are through September 17, 2018.

6

–4

10 2. Emerging Market Economies

Euro high yield
US high grade

16

0

–1
Sep.
21

600

1

15

6

2

400

2013 14

8 1. Advanced Economies

800

2

–1

6

0
Sep.
21

Latest relative to August 2018
August 2018 relative to February 2018

7

Sep. 15, 2017
Mar. 21, 2018
Sep. 17, 2018

0.5

6

8

United States
Euro area
United Kingdom

1.5

0.0

(Percent)

ments and limited the capacity of banks to engage in
cross-currency swap and forward transactions. The
effective rate was increased first by providing liquidity
to banks at the higher overnight lending rate rather
than the weekly repo rate, and, in early September, by
a 625 basis point hike in the benchmark policy rate.
Several other central banks (India, Indonesia,
Mexico, Philippines) have also raised policy rates in
recent months as headline inflation has risen and,
in some cases, currencies have come under pressure
(Figure 1.6). In China, the central bank maintained
its policy rate while lowering banks’ required reserve

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Figure 1.6. Emerging Market Economies: Interest Rates and
Spreads
Among emerging markets, policy rates have generally increased since the spring
(the sharp increase for emerging Europe reﬂects the policy rate hikes in Turkey).
Long-term government bond yields have also generally increased, and sovereign
spreads have widened over the past six months. Spreads have widened
signiﬁcantly more in countries with greater external ﬁnancing needs.
China
Latin America

Emerging Europe
Emerging Asia excluding China
13 1. Policy Rate1
(Percent)
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
2012
13

14

15

2. Ten-Year Government Bond Yields
(Percent)

14
12

16

17

Sep.
18

1

10
8
6
4
2

2013

14

15

16

17

Sep.
18

16

17

Sep.
18

3. EMBI Sovereign Spreads1
(Basis points)

600
500
400
300
200
100
0

2013

Change in EMBI spread
(basis points, Apr. 16–Sep. 14)

ratio in two separate moves (targeted to certain banks
in April, followed by a more general cut in July) to
support lending. Long-term yields have generally
increased and sovereign spreads have widened, reflecting a reduction in bond flows to emerging markets in
recent months. However, markets appear to be discriminating across countries, as spreads have widened
to a much larger extent for countries with greater
external financing needs (Figure 1.6, panel 4). Equity
indices in emerging market and developing economies have generally declined, reflecting rising trade
tensions and tighter external financial conditions
(Figure 1.7). In some cases (for example, China),
domestic regulatory tightening has contributed to a
retreat in equity prices.
Currency movements for other emerging market and
developing economies have mostly reflected developments in underlying fundamentals and perceptions of
future policy direction (Figure 1.5, panel 2). Between
February and mid-September, the Brazilian real declined
14 percent as domestic activity slowed and external
financial conditions became tighter, while the Chinese
renminbi depreciated by 3.5 percent as macro policies shifted to a more accommodative stance in recent
months, and as trade tensions with the United States
rose. The South African rand depreciated by some 14
percent on weaker-than-expected activity in the first half
of the year and slow reform progress, unwinding some
of the earlier gains associated with the change in the
leadership. In contrast, the Mexican peso has appreciated
by over 3½ percent since February after concerns about
postelection shifts in policy direction began to fade,
counteracting some of the negative sentiment stemming
from US tariff actions and uncertainty surrounding
NAFTA’s future prior to the August agreement.
Tracking indicators and early data releases suggest
that, after a buoyant start to the year, capital flows
to emerging markets weakened considerably in the
second quarter and beyond (Figure 1.8). In particular, evidence from investment fund flows and other
high-frequency data sources suggests that nonresident
portfolio flows, which were strong during 2017 and
early 2018, turned negative in May–June of 2018,
consistent with foreign exchange market pressures on
several emerging market economies. While portfolio
flows appeared to have stabilized during July, alongside currency valuations, outflows have resumed in
August amid weakening investor sentiment following
the depreciation of the Turkish lira and the Argentinean peso.

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

14

15

300 4. Current Account Balance and Change in EMBI Spreads
ARG
MEX

200
100
0

–100
–12

IDN

TUR

TUN

ZAF

EGY
ROU
y = –14.25x + 22.12
R 2 = 0.45
–10

HUN

BRA POL MYS

IND
MAR COL CHL PHL
PER

–8
–6
–4
–2
0
Current account 2017 (percent of GDP)

RUS
CHN
2

4

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Haver Analytics; IMF, International Financial
Statistics; Thomson Reuters Datastream; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Emerging Asia excluding China comprises India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines, and Thailand (except EMBI spread); emerging Europe comprises
Poland, Romania, Russia, and Turkey; Latin America comprises Brazil, Chile,
Colombia, Mexico, and Peru. EMBI = J.P. Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index.
Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
1
Data are through September 14, 2018.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

7

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 1.7. Emerging Market Economies: Equity Markets and
Credit

Capital ﬂows to emerging markets appear to have weakened considerably in the
second quarter of 2018, with nonresident portfolio ﬂows turning negative in
May–June 2018.

Equity indices have declined amid rising trade tensions and somewhat tighter
external ﬁnancial conditions.
220 1. Equity Markets
(Index, 2007 = 100)
200

Emerging Asia
excluding China

40 1. Net Flows in Emerging Market Funds
Bond
(Billions of US dollars)
30
Equity
Taper
20
tantrum
10
0
–10 Greek
1st ECB
–20 crisis Irish
China equity
crisis LTROs
–30
market sell-off
–40
2010
11
12
13
14
15
16

Latin America

180
160
140
120
100
80
60

Emerging Europe

40

2012

13

China
14

15

16

17

Aug.
18

Real Credit Growth1
(Year-over-year percent change)
2.

25

BRA
IND

20

3.

CHN
MEX

15 2. Capital Inﬂows
(Percent of GDP)
12

IDN
RUS

40
30
20
10

0
–5

0

–10
14

15

16

17 Jun.
18

2012 13

14

15

16

–10
17 Jun.
18

0

75

–6

65

210

COL
IND
TUR

190

55

170

45

150

35

130

25

110

15
2006 08

10

12

14

16 18:
Q2

30
MEX (right scale)
CHN
MYS

Aug.
18

08

09

10

11

12

16

18:
Q1

16

18:
Q1

16

18:
Q1

Total
13

14

15

15 3. Capital Outﬂows Excluding Change in Reserves
(Percent of GDP)
12
Emerging Europe
9
Emerging Asia excluding China
Latin America
6
3
China
Saudi Arabia

–6

2007

08

09

10

11

12

Total
13

14

15

25
20
15
10

15
12

4. Change in Reserves
(Percent of GDP)

9

Emerging Europe
Emerging Asia excluding China
Latin America

6
3

5

0

0
90
2006 08 10 12 14 16 18:
Q2

–3

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Haver Analytics; IMF, International Financial
Statistics (IFS); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country
codes.
1
Credit is other depository corporations’ claims on the private sector (from IFS),
except in the case of Brazil, for which private sector credit is from the Monetary
Policy and Financial System Credit Operations published by Banco Central do
Brasil, and China, for which credit is total social ﬁnancing after adjusting for local
government debt swaps.

8

2007

–3

230 5.
BRA
IDN
RUS

China
Saudi Arabia

–3

0

Credit-to-GDP Ratio1
(Percent)
85 4.

17

3

5

2012 13

US presidential
election

6

10

–15

EM-VXY

Emerging Europe
Emerging Asia excluding China
Latin America

9
COL
MYS
TUR

15

Figure 1.8. Emerging Market Economies: Capital Flows

–6

China
Saudi Arabia
2007

08

09

10

11

12

Total
13

14

15

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; EPFR Global; Haver Analytics; IMF, International
Financial Statistics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Capital inﬂows are net purchases of domestic assets by nonresidents.
Capital outﬂows are net purchases of foreign assets by domestic residents.
Emerging Asia excluding China comprises India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines, and Thailand; emerging Europe comprises Poland, Romania, Russia,
and Turkey; Latin America comprises Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru.
ECB = European Central Bank; EM-VXY = J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Volatility
Index; LTROs = long-term reﬁnancing operations.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Forces Shaping the Outlook
Diverging Cyclical Positions
While the global expansion is projected to continue
in 2018 and 2019, it is becoming less synchronized.
Compared with 2017, which saw the most widely
shared pickup in country annual growth rates since
2010, a smaller share of countries, particularly among
advanced economies, is expected to experience an
acceleration of activity for 2018 and beyond.4 In
part, this reflects diverging cyclical positions, with
expansions peaking in some countries while others
continue to emerge from deep recession. Recent fuel
price increases also have varying impacts on short-term
prospects for fuel exporters and importers.
Following a stretch of above-trend growth in
advanced economies during 2015–17, output gaps
have closed or are set to close in most cases. As remaining slack diminishes and high capacity utilization
begins to constrain supply, the growth rate of output
is projected to start declining toward its potential,
particularly among some euro area countries and in
Japan. The US economy is an important exception to
the pattern. It is expected to continue to grow above
potential until 2020, helped by sizable fiscal stimulus. The pace of expansion is expected to dip below
the economy’s potential growth rate thereafter as the
stimulus reverses and reinforces the effects of ongoing
monetary tightening.

The Impact of Commodity Price Increases
Most nonfood commodities have registered price
increases since mid-2017. Most notable has been
the increase in oil prices—about $30 a barrel, or
70 percent, since June 2017. Some of this increase is
expected to dissipate over the medium term because
of higher US shale production and OPEC+ supply.
Nonetheless, as shown in the Commodities Special Feature, oil futures curves are notably higher
than a year ago.
The improved outlook for oil prices contributes
to revisions to growth prospects for fuel exporters
and importers—with a more notable impact on the
4In

2017, 58 percent of countries, accounting for 75 percent of
world GDP in purchasing-power-parity terms, experienced a pickup
in year-over-year growth rates. In 2018, 52 percent of economies,
accounting for 47 percent of world GDP, are projected to register
a pickup in annual growth rates. For 2019, the corresponding
numbers are 54 percent of economies, accounting for 32 percent
of global GDP.

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

exporters, given the implied magnitude of the changes
in disposable income (Figure 1.9). A comparison of
forecast revisions between the April 2018 WEO and
the current report shows an upward revision of about
0.1 and 0.3 percentage point for 2018 and 2019,
respectively, for a group of fuel exporters, excluding
countries whose prospects are heavily conditioned
by domestic strife, geopolitical tensions, or outright
macroeconomic collapse. In contrast, growth prospects
for the same period have been revised downward by
about 0.1–0.3 percentage point for the rest of the
world, a group dominated by fuel importers (Figure 1.9, panel 3).

Investment, Trade, and the Global Expansion
A core element of the 2017 upsurge in global
growth and trade was the pickup in investment in
advanced economies and an end to investment contractions in some large, stressed commodity exporters.
Overall, both global imports and investment growth,
at about 5 percent, were the highest since the 2010–11
rebound from the global financial crisis. This pace of
expansion in investment is projected to ease in 2018
and 2019 compared with 2017, with a more notable
decline in trade growth (Figure 1.10).
Despite this easing, investment growth in emerging market and developing economies is projected to
remain robust over the next five years at about 5½
percent, accounting for well over one-third of their
GDP growth rate during that period (Figure 1.11).
Medium-term prospects for investment growth are
much weaker in advanced economies, with capital
spending projected to slow considerably as growth
declines toward its lower potential rate and the fiscal
stimulus in the United States begins to unwind.
At the same time, rising trade tensions and policy
uncertainty—discussed in more detail below—raise
concerns about global economic prospects. These
factors could lead firms to postpone or forgo capital
spending and hence slow down growth in investment
and demand. This slowdown would also weaken trade
growth, as capital and intermediate goods account for
an important share of global trade. As mentioned earlier,
high-frequency data point to a slowdown in global trade
and industrial production, somewhat weaker manufacturing purchasing managers’ indices, and especially weaker
export orders, but the extent to which these factors
have affected capital spending and trade are still unclear.
Consistent with signs of slower production of capital
International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

9

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 1.10. Global Investment and Trade

Figure 1.9. Impact of Commodity Price Changes

(Percent change)

Higher oil prices have led to a sizable increase in the projected terms-of-trade
windfall gains and losses in 2018–19. This is reﬂected in growth forecast
revisions relative to the April 2018 World Economic Outlook: Nonstressed fuel
exporters are expected to grow faster in 2018–19 than previously projected, while
growth prospects for oil importers were revised downward.
Windfall Gains and Losses for Commodity
20 1. Terms-of-Trade
Exporters1
(Percent of GDP)
10

5
0

–10

–5
2015–16 (cumulative)
2017
2018–19 (average; Feb. 2018 commodity prices)
2018–19 (average; Aug. 2018 commodity prices)

–20
–30
SAU

KAZ
DZA

RUS
NGA

MYS
COL

AUS
CAN

ARG
MEX

–2
EGY

POL
FRA

ITA
DEU

ESP
CHN

IND
JPN

07

09

11

13

Commodity exporters

PAK

17

19

3. Real Imports,
Advanced Economies

20
15

10

10

5

5

0

0

–5

–5

–10

–10

–15

–15

–20
2005 07 09 11 13 15 17 19

THA

15

Commodity importers

20 2. Real Investment,
Advanced Economies
15

0

TUR

–15
2005

BRA

2

USA

Real investment
Real GDP at market prices
Real imports

–10

IDN

14 2. Terms-of-Trade Windfall Gains and Losses for Commodity
Importers1
12
(Percent of GDP)
10
2015–16 (cumulative)
8
2017
2018–19 (average; Feb. 2018 commodity prices)
6
2018–19 (average; Aug. 2018 commodity prices)
4

–4

15 1. World
10

0

–40

The pace of expansion of global investment is projected to ease in 2018 and 2019
compared with 2017, with a more notable decline in trade growth.

–20
2005 07 09 11 13 15 17 19

KOR
5. Real Imports, Emerging 30
Market and Developing 25
Economies
20

1.6 3. Growth Forecast Revisions from April 2018 to October 20182
(Percentage points)
1.2

30 4. Real Investment,
Emerging Market and
25
Developing Economies
20

0.8

15

15

0.4

10

10

0.0

5

5

0

0

–5

–5

–10

–10

–0.4
–0.8
–1.2
–1.6

2018
2019
Nonstressed fuel exporters

2018
2019
Fuel importers

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) country codes.
1
Gains (losses) for 2018–19 are simple averages of annual incremental gains
(losses) for 2018 and 2019. The windfall is an estimate of the change in disposable
income arising from commodity price changes. The windfall gain in year t for a
country exporting x US dollars of commodity A and importing m US dollars of
commodity B in year t –1 is deﬁned as (ΔptAxt – 1 – ΔptBmt – 1) / Yt – 1, in which
ΔptA and ΔptB are the percentage changes in the prices of A and B between year
t –1 and year t, and Y is GDP in year t – 1 in US dollars. See also Gruss (2014).
2
The yellow horizontal line inside each box represents the median; the upper and
lower edges of each box show the top and bottom quartiles; the red markers
denote the top and bottom deciles; and the gray square indicates the
purchasing-power-parity-weighted mean. Stressed fuel exporters include Iran,
Iraq, Libya, South Sudan, Venezuela, and Yemen.

10

–15
2005 07 09 11 13 15 17 19

–15
2005 07 09 11 13 15 17 19

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: World and advanced economies exclude Ireland. Commodity exporters
include fuel and nonfuel primary products exporters listed in Table D of the
Statistical Appendix, as well as Australia, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, New Zealand,
Norway, and Peru.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

goods, the forecast for fixed investment growth in 2018
was revised downward in advanced economies by about
0.4 percentage point relative to the April 2018 WEO,
particularly in advanced Asia and the United Kingdom.
This downward revision was accompanied by downward
revisions to export growth (by over 1 percentage point)
and especially import growth (by 1.4 percentage point).
The forecast for investment and trade growth in 2019
is also weaker. For emerging market and developing
economies, trade growth was revised down modestly for
2018 and more substantially for 2019. The forecast for
investment growth for 2018–19 is weaker than in April,
despite higher capital spending in India, on account of
contracting investment in economies under stress, such as
Argentina and Turkey, which is also reflected in a downward revision for import growth, particularly for 2019.

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Figure 1.11. Contributions to GDP Growth
(Percent)

In the medium term, investment growth is projected to remain robust in emerging
market and developing economies, accounting for well over one-third of their GDP
growth. In advanced economies, investment growth is expected to weaken
signiﬁcantly over the next ﬁve years.
Inventories
Public consumption
Fixed investment

Net foreign balance
Private consumption
GDP

6 1. Advanced Economies
5
4
3
2
1
0

Structural Headwinds
The cyclical upsurge in global growth that began in
mid-2016—and is now extended by procyclical fiscal
stimulus in the United States and associated favorable
spillovers to trading partners—has helped overcome powerful structural headwinds acting on potential growth.
After the cyclical boost in demand and the US stimulus
run their course, and as growth in China continues to
slow in line with the necessary rebalancing of the economy, global growth is set to moderate, weighed down by
structural drags. The increase in trade costs would also
depress medium-term prospects by hindering efficient
resource allocation, investment, and productivity.
•• Among advanced economies, the subdued outlook
for potential growth reflects, to a large extent, slower
labor force growth due to population aging (as
discussed in Chapter 2 of the April 2018 WEO).
While labor productivity growth is expected to
improve in the medium term, the slight acceleration
will only partially offset the slower increases in labor
input. Box 1.1 discusses the rise in corporate market
power in advanced economies, a trend that could be
a further drag on business dynamism, investment,
and productivity. Some policy measures that are supporting short-term activity in some economies (such
as larger US fiscal deficits) are not sustainable—and
hence come at the cost of lower future growth
because they will need to be reversed.
•• Among emerging market and developing economies,
prospects for many economies to close income gaps
relative to advanced economies appear weaker than
in the past (Figure 1.12). Some 45 emerging market

–1

2015

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

21

22

23

6 2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1

2015

16

17

18

19

20

Source: IMF staff calculations.

and developing economies—accounting for 10
percent of world GDP in purchasing-power-parity
terms—are projected to grow by less than advanced
economies in per capita terms over 2018–23, and
hence to fall further behind in living standards.
Commodity prices, despite their recent increase,
are projected to remain below the levels seen before
2011–13. Commodity exporters face a difficult
adjustment to structurally lower revenues than in
the past, requiring diversification of their economies
away from commodity dependence and mobilization
of noncommodity sources of revenue to finance
pressing development needs. The adjustment costs
associated with this transition will weigh on the
medium-term growth outlook for this group of
economies.
International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

11

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 1.12. Per Capita Real GDP Growth
(Percent)

Prospects for emerging market and developing economies to narrow gaps in living
standards relative to advanced economies are uneven.
1995–2005

2006–17

2018–23

10 1. By Country Group
8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6

AEs

EMDEs

China

Fuel exporters

Nonfuel
exporters
excluding China

8 2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, by Region
6
4
2
0
–2

LAC

MENAP

EMDE Asia
excluding
China

EMDE
Europe

SSA

CIS

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; CIS = Commonwealth of Independent States;
EMDE = emerging market and developing economy; LAC = Latin America and the
Caribbean; MENAP = Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan; PPP =
purchasing power parity; SSA = sub-Saharan Africa. Bars denote PPP
GDP-weighted averages, red markers indicate the medians, and black markers
denote the top and bottom deciles of per capita GDP growth in the country groups.
The fuel and nonfuel exporter subgroups are deﬁned in Table D of the Statistical
Appendix and cover EMDEs only.

policy is expected to be contractionary in advanced
economies as the US fiscal stimulus begins to unwind.
The fiscal stance is assumed to be broadly neutral in
emerging market and developing economies through
the forecast horizon.
Monetary policy stances are projected to diverge
among advanced economies. The US federal funds target is expected to increase to about 2.5 percent by the
end of 2018 and about 3.5 percent by the end of 2019
(the forecast assumes a total of eight rate hikes during
2018–19). The policy target rate is expected to decline
to 2.9 percent in 2022. Policy rates are projected to
remain negative in the euro area until mid-2019 and
close to zero in Japan through the end of 2019. They
are expected to rise gradually thereafter but to remain
very low through the forecast horizon in both cases.
For emerging market economies, monetary policy
stances are assumed to vary, based on the economies’
cyclical positions.
The baseline forecast incorporates the impact of
tariffs that had been announced by the United States
as of mid-September, namely a 10 percent tariff
on all aluminum imports, a 25 percent tariff on all
steel imports, a 25 percent tariff on $50 billion of
imports from China imposed in July and August, and
a 10 percent tariff on an additional $200 billion of
imports from China imposed in late September, rising
to 25 percent by year end, as well as the retaliatory
measures taken by trading partners.6 The forecast
assumes that part of the negative effect of these trade
measures will be offset by policy stimulus from China
(and possibly other economies as well). The forecast
does not incorporate the impact of further tariffs on
Chinese and other imports threatened by the United
States, but not yet implemented, due to uncertainty
about their exact magnitude, timing, and potential
retaliatory response. Scenario Box 1 discusses the
potential economic consequences of further escalation
in trade tensions and rising trade barriers.

The Forecast
Policy Assumptions
The WEO baseline forecast assumes an expansionary
fiscal policy stance for advanced economies in 2018,
owing largely to US fiscal stimulus, turning neutral
in 2019 (Figure 1.13).5 From 2020 onward, fiscal
5The

revision to the expected fiscal policy stance for advanced
economies in 2019 relative to the April 2018 WEO reflects smaller-​
than-previously anticipated declines in the structural primary
balances of the United States and France, which outweigh the

12

Assumptions about Financial Conditions and
Commodity Prices
The baseline forecast assumes that global financial
conditions will tighten gradually as the expansion
more expansionary-than-previously projected stance of Germany,
Greece, and Italy.
6In particular, the Chinese authorities have announced tariffs
ranging from 5–10 percent on $60 billion of imports from the
United States in response to the US tariffs imposed in September.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

continues in 2018–19, but remain generally supportive of growth. A well-communicated, data-dependent
normalization of monetary policy in the United States
and the United Kingdom is expected to continue,
leading to a steady increase in long-term interest rates.
Financial market volatility is assumed to remain low.
The increase in advanced economy long-term sovereign
bond yields is expected to generate some rebalancing
of global portfolios. Nonetheless, barring some cases
in which macroeconomic and financial imbalances
have increased in recent years, sovereign bond spreads
for most emerging market economies are assumed to
remain contained.
The IMF’s Primary Commodity Price Index is
projected to increase about 18 percent in 2018 from
its 2017 average (a cumulative increase from 2016 of
about 36 percent) and then to fall marginally in 2019.
Oil prices are expected to average $69.38 a barrel
in 2018 (higher than the April 2018 WEO projection
of $62.30 and the 2017 price of $52.80 a barrel).
Global oil supply is expected to gradually increase over
the forecast horizon, lowering oil prices to $68.76 a
barrel in 2019, and further to about $60 a barrel in
2023. Metal prices are expected to increase by about
5.3 percent in 2018, before declining by 3.6 percent
in 2019 as the effects of recent tariff actions take hold
and trade policy uncertainty weighs on metals demand.

Global Growth Outlook
Global growth is projected at 3.7 percent in 2018
and 2019, 0.2 percentage point below the April
2018 WEO, even though well above its level during
2012–16. Differences in the outlook across countries
and regions are notable (Table 1.1, Annex Tables
1.1.1–1.1.7, and Boxes 1.2 and 1.3 provide details
of country projections). Global growth is expected to
remain steady at 3.7 percent in 2020, as the decline in
advanced economy growth with the unwinding of the
US fiscal stimulus and the fading of the favorable spillovers from US demand to trading partners is offset by
a pickup in emerging market and developing economy
growth. Thereafter, global growth is projected to slow
to 3.6 percent by 2022–23, largely reflecting a moderation in advanced economy growth toward the potential
of that group.
Growth in advanced economies will remain well
above trend at 2.4 percent in 2018, before softening
to 2.1 percent in 2019. The forecast for both years is
0.1 percentage point weaker than in the April 2018

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Figure 1.13. Fiscal Indicators

(Percent of GDP, unless noted otherwise)
The ﬁscal policy stance in advanced economies is assumed to be expansionary in
2018, before turning neutral in 2019. In emerging market and developing
economies, the ﬁscal policy stance is assumed to be broadly neutral.
1.0 1. Change in the Structural Primary Fiscal Balance
(Percentage points)
0.5
0.0
–0.5

2014
2015
2017
2018
April 2018 WEO

–1.0
–1.5

2016
2019

Advanced
economies

Emerging market and
developing economies

2.5 2. Change in the Structural Primary Fiscal Balance
(Percentage points)
2.0
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
1.5
April 2018 WEO
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
France, Germany, Greece, Ireland,
United States
Japan1
United Kingdom
Italy, Portugal,
Spain
2 3. Fiscal Balance
0
–2
–4
World
Advanced
economies

–6
–8
–10
2001

03

05

07

Emerging market and
developing economies
09

11

13

15

17

19

21

23

180 4. Gross Public Debt
World
Advanced economies2
160
Major advanced
Emerging and
Latin America and
140
economies2,3
developing Asia
the Caribbean
120
Other emerging market and
100
developing economies
80
60
40
20
1950
60
70
80
90
2000
10
20 23
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1
Japan’s latest ﬁgures reﬂect comprehensive methodological revisions adopted in
December 2016.
2
Data through 2000 exclude the United States.
3
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

13

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections
(Percent change, unless noted otherwise)

World Output
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Commonwealth of Independent States
Russia
Excluding Russia
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India3
ASEAN-54
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Saudi Arabia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Nigeria
South Africa
Memorandum
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
World Trade Volume (goods and services)
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Commodity Prices (US dollars)
Oil5
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity export
weights)
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies6

2017
3.7
2.3
2.2
2.4
2.5
2.3
1.5
3.0
1.7
1.7
3.0
2.8

Projections
2018
2019
3.7
3.7
2.4
2.1
2.9
2.5
2.0
1.9
1.9
1.9
1.6
1.6
1.2
1.0
2.7
2.2
1.1
0.9
1.4
1.5
2.1
2.0
2.8
2.5

Difference from July
2018 WEO Update1
2018
2019
–0.2
–0.2
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.2
–0.2
0.0
–0.3
–0.2
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.2

Difference from April
2018 WEO1
2018
2019
–0.2
–0.2
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.1
–0.6
–0.1
–0.5
–0.4
–0.3
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
–0.1

4.7
2.1
1.5
3.6
6.5
6.9
6.7
5.3
6.0
1.3
1.0
2.0
2.2
–0.9
2.7
0.8
1.3

4.7
2.3
1.7
3.9
6.5
6.6
7.3
5.3
3.8
1.2
1.4
2.2
2.4
2.2
3.1
1.9
0.8

4.7
2.4
1.8
3.6
6.3
6.2
7.4
5.2
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.5
2.7
2.4
3.8
2.3
1.4

–0.2
0.0
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.5
–0.4
–0.4
–0.1
–1.1
0.3
–0.3
–0.2
–0.7

–0.4
0.2
0.3
–0.1
–0.2
–0.2
–0.1
–0.1
–1.6
–0.4
–0.1
–0.2
–1.2
0.5
0.0
0.0
–0.3

–0.2
0.1
0.0
0.4
0.0
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.5
–0.8
–0.9
–0.1
–1.0
0.5
–0.3
–0.2
–0.7

–0.4
0.3
0.3
0.0
–0.3
–0.2
–0.4
–0.2
–1.7
–0.6
–0.1
–0.5
–1.0
0.5
0.1
0.4
–0.3

2.7
4.7
1.8
3.2

2.2
4.7
2.0
3.2

2.0
5.2
2.5
3.1

–0.2
–0.3
–1.2
–0.1

–0.1
–0.1
–1.3
–0.2

–0.3
–0.3
–1.2
–0.2

–0.1
–0.1
–1.1
–0.2

5.2

4.2

4.0

–0.6

–0.5

–0.9

–0.7

4.2
7.0

3.7
6.0

4.0
4.8

–0.8
0.0

–0.4
–0.9

–1.4
0.0

–0.5
–0.8

4.4
6.9

3.4
4.7

3.1
4.8

–0.8
–0.6

–0.6
–0.3

–1.1
–0.4

–0.8
–0.5

23.3

31.4

–0.9

–1.6

0.9

13.4

5.6

6.8

2.7

–0.7

–3.3

–1.2

–2.9

–1.2

1.7
4.3

2.0
5.0

1.9
5.2

–0.2
0.3

–0.3
0.7

0.0
0.2

0.0
0.7

London Interbank Offered Rate (percent)
On US Dollar Deposits (six month)
1.5
2.5
3.4
–0.1
–0.1
0.1
0.0
On Euro Deposits (three month)
–0.3
–0.3
–0.2
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.2
On Japanese Yen Deposits (six month)
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Note: Real effective exchange rates are assumed to remain constant at the levels prevailing during July 17–August 14, 2018. Economies are listed on the basis of
economic size. The aggregated quarterly data are seasonally adjusted. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1Difference based on rounded figures for the current, July 2018 World Economic Outlook Update, and April 2018 World Economic Outlook forecasts. The differences are also adjusted to include Argentina’s consumer prices since the July 2018 Update.
2Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
3For India, data and forecasts are presented on a fiscal year basis and GDP from 2011 onward is based on GDP at market prices with fiscal year 2011/12 as a
base year.
4Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam.

14

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Table 1.1 (continued)
Q4 over Q47

Year over Year

World Output
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Commonwealth of Independent States
Russia
Excluding Russia
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India3
ASEAN-54
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Saudi Arabia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Nigeria
South Africa
Memorandum
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
World Trade Volume (goods and services)
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Commodity Prices (US dollars)
Oil5
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity export
weights)
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies6

Projections
2018
2019
3.7
3.7
2.4
2.1
2.9
2.5
2.0
1.9
1.9
1.9
1.6
1.6
1.2
1.0
2.7
2.2
1.1
0.9
1.4
1.5
2.1
2.0
2.8
2.5

2016
3.3
1.7
1.6
1.9
2.2
1.1
0.9
3.2
1.0
1.8
1.4
2.3

2017
3.7
2.3
2.2
2.4
2.5
2.3
1.5
3.0
1.7
1.7
3.0
2.8

4.4
0.4
–0.2
2.0
6.5
6.7
7.1
4.9
3.3
–0.6
–3.5
2.9
5.1
1.7
1.4
–1.6
0.6

4.7
2.1
1.5
3.6
6.5
6.9
6.7
5.3
6.0
1.3
1.0
2.0
2.2
–0.9
2.7
0.8
1.3

4.7
2.3
1.7
3.9
6.5
6.6
7.3
5.3
3.8
1.2
1.4
2.2
2.4
2.2
3.1
1.9
0.8

2.0
3.6
5.2
2.5

2.7
4.7
1.8
3.2

2.2

Projections
2018
2019
3.5
3.8
2.3
1.9
3.1
2.3
1.7
1.9
1.9
1.6
1.3
1.7
0.8
1.3
2.5
2.1
1.0
–0.3
1.5
1.4
2.1
1.9
2.8
2.4

2016
3.2
2.0
1.9
2.0
1.9
1.2
1.0
2.9
1.5
1.7
2.0
2.6

2017
4.0
2.5
2.5
2.7
2.8
2.8
1.6
3.0
2.0
1.3
3.0
2.9

4.7
2.4
1.8
3.6
6.3
6.2
7.4
5.2
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.5
2.7
2.4
3.8
2.3
1.4

4.4
1.0
0.8
...
6.3
6.8
6.1
4.8
3.8
–0.8
–2.4
3.3
...
2.1
...
...
1.0

5.2
1.7
1.2
...
6.7
6.8
7.7
5.4
6.1
1.7
2.2
1.6
...
–1.4
...
...
1.9

4.6
2.2
2.1
...
6.2
6.4
6.5
5.1
0.9
0.5
1.7
2.2
...
3.5
...
...
0.5

5.3
2.3
1.9
...
6.5
6.2
7.9
5.6
4.0
2.8
2.5
3.0
...
2.1
...
...
0.9

2.2
4.7
2.0
3.2

2.0
5.2
2.5
3.1

2.1
...
...
2.7

2.8
...
...
3.4

1.9
...
...
3.0

2.1
...
...
3.0

5.2

4.2

4.0

...

...

...

...

2.4
1.8

4.2
7.0

3.7
6.0

4.0
4.8

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

1.8
3.0

4.4
6.9

3.4
4.7

3.1
4.8

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

–15.7

23.3

31.4

–0.9

16.2

19.6

19.6

–3.6

–1.5

6.8

2.7

–0.7

10.3

1.9

1.3

1.9

0.8
4.2

1.7
4.3

2.0
5.0

1.9
5.2

1.2
4.2

1.7
3.7

2.1
4.6

1.9
4.1

London Interbank Offered Rate (percent)
On US Dollar Deposits (six month)
1.1
1.5
2.5
3.4
...
...
...
...
On Euro Deposits (three month)
–0.3
–0.3
–0.3
–0.2
...
...
...
...
On Japanese Yen Deposits (six month)
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
...
...
...
...
5Simple average of prices of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil. The average price of oil in US dollars a barrel was $52.81 in
2017; the assumed price, based on futures markets, is $69.38 in 2018 and $68.76 in 2019.
6Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina starting from 2017 onward. See country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes”
section of the Statistical Appendix.
7For World Output, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 90 percent of annual world output at purchasing-power-parity weights.
For Emerging Market and Developing Economies, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 80 percent of annual emerging market
and developing economies’ output at purchasing-power-parity weights.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

15

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

WEO. In 2018, weaker-than-expected outturns in the
first half of the year have led to downward revisions for
the euro area and the United Kingdom. In 2019, recent
trade measures are expected to weigh on economic
activity, especially in the United States, where the 2019
growth forecast was revised down by 0.2 percentage
point. Growth is expected to decline to 1.8 percent in
2020 as the US fiscal stimulus begins to unwind and
euro area growth moderates toward its medium-term
potential. Growth is projected to fall to 1.4 percent
later on as working-age population growth continues to
slow and productivity growth remains moderate.
With emerging Asia continuing to expand at a
strong pace—despite a 0.3 percentage point downward
revision to the 2019 growth forecast mostly driven by
recently announced trade measures—and activity in
commodity exporters firming, growth in the emerging
market and developing economy group is set to remain
steady at 4.7 percent in 2018–19. Over the medium
term, growth is projected to rise to slightly less than
5 percent. Beyond 2019, the aggregate growth rate for
the group reflects offsetting developments as growth
moderates to a sustainable pace in China, while it
improves in India (owing to structural reforms and
a still-favorable demographic dividend), commodity
exporters (though to rates below the average of recent
decades), and some economies experiencing macroeconomic stress in 2018–19. In comparison with the April
2018 WEO, the growth forecast for emerging market
and developing economies was marked down for 2018
and 2019 by 0.2 percentage point and 0.4 percentage
point, respectively, and for 2020–23 by about 0.2 percentage point. For 2018–19, the main sources of the
downward revision are the negative expected impact of
the trade measures implemented since the April 2018
WEO on activity in China and other economies in
emerging Asia, much weaker activity in Iran following
the reimposition of US sanctions, a sharp projected
slowdown in Turkey following the ongoing market turmoil, and a more subdued outlook for large economies
in Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Mexico). Over
2020–23, the revisions primarily reflect a downward
reassessment of the still-strong growth prospects for
India and a lower growth forecast for Pakistan and Turkey, in addition to continued weaker growth in Iran.

Inflation Outlook
Largely reflecting recent increases in commodity
prices, inflation is expected to rise this year across
16

both advanced and emerging market and developing
economies. In advanced economies, it is projected
to pick up to 2 percent in 2018, from 1.7 percent
in 2017. Inflation in emerging market and developing
economies excluding Venezuela is expected to increase
to 5.0 percent this year from 4.3 percent in 2017
(Box 1.4 provides details of the inflation outlook for
individual countries).
Among advanced economies, core inflation will rise
over the forecast horizon, with differentiation across
countries mostly based on cyclical positions. In the
United States, for example, core personal consumption expenditure price inflation, the Federal Reserve’s
preferred measure, is expected to rise to 2.1 percent
in 2018 and 2.3 percent in 2019 (from 1.6 percent
in 2017), as the sizable, procyclical fiscal stimulus lifts
output above potential. Core inflation is assumed to
gradually decline to 2 percent thereafter, with a monetary policy response that ensures expectations remain
well anchored. In the euro area, core harmonized index
of consumer prices inflation is projected to increase
slowly to 2 percent by 2022, reflecting the influence of
backward-looking elements in the inflation processes.
Within the group of emerging market and developing economies, core inflation rates are expected to be
more dispersed than among advanced economies. To a
large extent, the dispersion reflects variation in cyclical
positions, anchoring of inflation expectations, and
inflation targets.

External Sector Outlook
Current Account Positions
After remaining broadly stable in 2017, current
account deficits and surpluses in 2018 are, on the whole,
forecast to widen slightly from 2017 (Figure 1.14).
The most notable drivers of predicted current account
changes for 2018 are the increase in oil prices, which
is expected to result in an improvement in the current
account balance of oil exporters of about 3 percent of
their GDP, and strong growth in the United States,
which is projected to lead to a modest widening of the
US current account deficit for this year. Given that most
fuel exporters were already running surpluses in 2017,
both factors will lead to some widening of global current
account imbalances.
Forecasts for 2019 and beyond indicate a gradual
decline in the current account balances of oil exporters (because average oil prices are projected to decline
compared with their current levels), as well as an initial

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

further widening of the US current account deficit,
driven by expansionary fiscal policy. Over the medium
term, current account balances should narrow again,
with a stabilization in the US current account deficit as
the expansionary effects of fiscal policy wane, coupled
with some narrowing of surpluses in China and, to a
lesser extent, in Europe. The recently imposed trade
measures by the United States and retaliatory actions
by trading partners are expected to have a limited
impact on external imbalances (see 2018 External Sector Report for a discussion of the relation between trade
costs and external imbalances).
As highlighted in the IMF’s 2018 External Sector
Report, many countries’ current account imbalances
in 2017 were too large in relation to country-specific
norms consistent with underlying fundamentals and
desirable policies. It is therefore interesting to document how current account balances are projected
to evolve in coming years. As shown in panel 1 of
Figure 1.15, current account balances in 2018 are
projected to move in a direction consistent with some
reduction in those excess imbalances (despite a larger
deficit in the United States and a larger surplus in Germany). Medium-term projections suggest, on average,
further movement of current account balances in the
same direction, but also feature a widening of the US
current account deficit and persistent large surpluses
in many advanced European and Asian economies
(Figure 1.15, panel 2).7 At the same time, given that
changes in macroeconomic fundamentals relative to
2017 affect not only current account balances but
also their equilibrium values, the path of future excess
imbalances cannot be precisely inferred from this
exercise.8
International Investment Positions
Changes in international investment positions reflect
both net financial flows and valuation changes arising
from fluctuations in exchange rates and asset prices.
Given that WEO projections assume broadly stable
real effective exchange rates and limited variation
in asset prices, changes in international investment
positions are driven by projections for net external bor7The change in the current account balance over 2018 would
offset, on average, about one-fifth of the 2017 current account gap,
while the change between 2017 and 2023 would offset about half of
the 2017 gap.
8For instance, an improvement in the terms of trade is typically
associated with a larger equilibrium current account balance and a
more appreciated equilibrium exchange rate.

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Figure 1.14. Global Current Account Balance
(Percent of world GDP)

After a slight widening in 2018, current account balances are expected to narrow
marginally over the medium term as the surpluses of oil exporters decline and the
US current account deﬁcit stabilizes with the fading of the expansionary effects of
ﬁscal policy.
4
3

Afr. and ME
Eur. creditors

Japan
Adv. Asia

China
Oil exporters

United States
Eur. debtors

Other adv.
Lat. Am.

Em. Asia
CEE

2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
2002

04

06

08

10

12

14

16

Discrepancy

18

20

22 23

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Adv. Asia = advanced Asia (Hong Kong SAR, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan
Province of China); Afr. and ME = Africa and the Middle East (Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Morocco, South
Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Tunisia); CEE = central and eastern Europe (Belarus,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic,
Turkey, Ukraine); Em. Asia = emerging Asia (India, Indonesia, Pakistan,
Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam); Eur. creditors = European creditors (Austria,
Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway,
Sweden, Switzerland); Eur. debtors = European debtors (Cyprus, Greece, Ireland,
Italy, Portugal, Spain, Slovenia); Lat. Am. = Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
Colombia, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay); Oil exporters = Algeria, Azerbaijan, Iran,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab
Emirates, Venezuela; Other adv. = other advanced economies (Australia, Canada,
France, Iceland, New Zealand, United Kingdom).

rowing and lending (in line with the current account
balance), with their ratios to domestic and world GDP
affected by projected growth rates for individual countries and for the world economy as a whole.9,10
9WEO forecasts include projections of 10-year government bond
yields, which would affect bond prices going forward, but the impact
of those changes in bond prices on the valuation of external assets
and liabilities is typically not included in international investment
position forecasts.
10Exchange rate changes can affect the evolution of international
investment positions. For instance, according to estimates by the
United States Bureau of Economic Analysis, the 7 percent depreciation of the US dollar in nominal effective terms between the end of
2016 and the end of 2017 improved the US net international investment position by about 6 percent of GDP by increasing the domestic currency value of foreign currency assets held by US residents.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

17

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 1.15. Current Account Balances in Relation to
Economic Fundamentals

Figure 1.16. Net International Investment Position
Creditor and debtor net international investment positions are projected to widen
slightly over the medium term.

1. 2017 Current Account Gaps and Change in Current
7 Account Balances, 2017–18
6
SAU
IDN
5
JPN
RUS
CHE
4
MEX
CAN
3
USA
2 ARG
AUS
KOR
SWE
HKG
1
DEU
MYS
GBR
0
SGP NLD
–1 BEL TUR
CHN
ZAF
POL
–2
FRA
THA
ESP ITA BRA IND
–3
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
Current account gap, 2017

Change in current-account-toGDP ratio, 2017–23

2. 2017 Current Account Gaps and Change in Current
4 Account Balances, 2017–23
2 ARG TUR RUS
HKG MEX SWE
GBR
0
KOR
BEL
AUS
–2 SAU FRA
CHN
ZAF
BRA
–4
ESP
IND POL
USA ITA
–6

MYS

DEU

SGP

–2

0
2
4
Current account gap, 2017

6

8

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country
codes.

As panel 1 of Figure 1.16 shows, over the next five
years, creditor and debtor positions as a share of world
GDP are projected to widen slightly. On the creditor
side, this is explained primarily by the growing creditor
positions of a group of European advanced economies,
a result of large projected current account surpluses.
On the debtor side, this reflects some increase in
the debtor position of the United States and other
advanced economies (a group including Canada,
France, and the United Kingdom, among others),
partially offset by a further sizable improvement in the
position of euro area debtor countries.
Similar trends are highlighted in panel 2 of Figure 1.16, which shows projected changes in net international investment positions as a percentage of domestic
18

20
10
0
–10
–20

United States
Eur. debtors

–30
–40

2005
40
30

07

Other adv.
Lat. Am.

09

11

13

Em. Asia
CEE
15

Eur. debtors

0
–10

19

21

23

Eur. creditors

20
10

17

2. Net IIP, 2017, and Projected Changes, 2017–23
(Percent of GDP)

Japan

CEE

United States
–50

Adv. Asia

Oil exporters

Lat. Am.
Afr. and ME

–20
–100 –75

THA

–8

–10
–4

NLD

1. Global International Investment Position
(Percent of world GDP)
40
Afr. and ME
Japan
China
30
Eur. creditors
Adv. Asia
Oil exporters

Projected change in IIP, 2017–23

Change in current-account-toGDP ratio, 2017–18

Current account balances in 2018 are projected to move in a direction consistent
with some reduction in excess imbalances. Medium-term projections suggest
further modest movement of current account balances in the same direction.

Em. Asia
Other
adv.
–25

0

China

25
50
Net IIP, 2017

75

100

125

150

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Adv. Asia = advanced Asia (Hong Kong SAR, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan
Province of China); Afr. and ME = Africa and the Middle East (Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Morocco, South
Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Tunisia); CEE = central and eastern Europe (Belarus,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic,
Turkey, Ukraine); Em. Asia = emerging Asia (India, Indonesia, Pakistan,
Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam); Eur. creditors = European creditors (Austria,
Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway,
Sweden, Switzerland); Eur. debtors = European debtors (Cyprus, Greece, Ireland,
Italy, Portugal, Spain, Slovenia); IIP = international investment position;
Lat. Am. = Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru,
Uruguay); Oil exporters = Algeria, Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Nigeria,
Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela; Other
adv. = Other advanced economies (Australia, Canada, France, Iceland, New
Zealand, United Kingdom).

GDP across countries and regions between 2017 and
2023, the last year of the WEO projection horizon. The
net creditor position of advanced European economies
is projected to exceed 85 percent of GDP and of Japan
to exceed 75 percent of GDP, while the net debtor
position of the United States is projected to approach
50 percent of GDP, some 9 percentage points above the
2017 estimate. In contrast, the net international investment position of a group of euro area debtor countries,

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Figure 1.17. Growth for Creditors and Debtors
(Percent)

In 2017 and 2018, domestic demand growth was faster in creditor countries than
in debtor countries.

Domestic and External Contributions
to GDP Growth

4
2
0

All creditors

Eur.
creditors

China

Japan

2018

2017

2018

2017

2018

2017

2018

2018

2017

2018

–4

2017

–2

Adv. Asia Oil exporters

8 2. Growth for Debtors
6
4
2

United
States

Eur.
Other adv. Latin
debtors
America

2017
2018

All
debtors

2017
2018

2017
2018

–2

2017
2018

0

2017
2018

Sustained excess external imbalances in the world’s
key economies and policy actions that threaten to
widen such imbalances pose risks to global stability.
The fiscal easing under way in the United States is
leading to a tightening of monetary conditions, a
stronger US dollar, and a larger US current account
deficit. These trends risk aggravating trade tensions and
may result in a faster tightening of global financing
conditions, with negative implications for emerging
market economies, especially those with weak external
positions. Over the medium term, widening debtor
positions in key economies could constrain global
growth and possibly result in sharp and disruptive
currency and asset price adjustments.
As discussed in the section titled “Policy Priorities,”
the US economy, which is already operating beyond
full employment, should implement a medium-term
plan to reverse the rising ratio of public debt, accompanied by fiscal measures to gradually boost domestic
capacity. This would help ensure more sustainable
growth dynamics as well as contain external imbalances. Stronger reliance on demand growth in some

6

2017
2018

Implications of Imbalances

8 1. Growth for Creditors

2017
2018

Another way to look at the prospects for global
rebalancing is to examine the domestic and external
contributions to GDP growth in creditor and debtor
countries. Growth in domestic demand was faster in
creditor countries than in debtor countries in 2017, as
in previous years, primarily reflecting high growth in
China (Figure 1.17). At the same time, the net external
contribution to growth was again positive for creditors, driven this time by positive contributions from
China, creditor Europe, and Japan. For 2018, the net
external contribution to growth is slightly negative for
creditors, with a positive contribution from creditor
Europe, Japan, and other advanced Asian economies
broadly offset by negative contributions from China
and oil exporters. Among debtor countries, the net
external contribution to growth is forecast to be positive for Latin American debtor countries and to remain
negative for the United States because of expansionary
fiscal policy.

Net external contribution to growth
Domestic demand contribution to growth
Total

2017

including Italy and Spain, is expected to improve by
more than 20 percentage points of their collective GDP,
and by 2023, net foreign liabilities would be about half
their level a decade earlier.

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Em. Asia

CEE

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Adv. Asia = advanced Asia (Hong Kong SAR, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan
Province of China); CEE = central and eastern Europe (Belarus, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic, Turkey, Ukraine);
Em. Asia = emerging Asia (India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Philippines, Thailand,
Vietnam); Eur. creditors = European creditors (Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland,
Germany, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland);
Eur. debtors = European debtors (Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Spain,
Slovenia); Latin America = Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru,
Uruguay; Other adv. = other advanced economies (Australia, Canada, France,
Iceland, New Zealand, United Kingdom); Oil exporters = Algeria, Azerbaijan, Iran,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab
Emirates, Venezuela.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

19

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

creditor countries, especially those with policy space
to support it, such as Germany, would help facilitate
domestic and global rebalancing while sustaining world
growth over the medium term.

Risks
The balance of risks to the short-term global growth
forecast has now shifted to the downside. The potential
for upside surprises has receded, given the tightening of
financial conditions in some parts of the world, the rise
in trade costs, slow implementation of reforms recommended in the past, and waning growth momentum,
reflected in worse-than-anticipated outturns in several
large economies, weakening growth of industrial production, and a softening of some high-frequency indicators.
At the same time, several of the downside risks highlighted in the April 2018 WEO have become more pronounced or have partially materialized—such as rising
trade barriers and a reversal of capital flows to emerging
market economies with weaker fundamentals and higher
political risk. With protectionist rhetoric increasingly
turned into action with the United States imposing
tariffs on a wide range of imports and retaliatory actions
by trading partners, escalation of trade tensions to an
intensity that carries systemic risk is a distinct possibility
without policy cooperation. And global financial conditions, while still generally easy, could tighten sharply,
triggered by faster-than-anticipated monetary policy
tightening in advanced economies or the emergence
of other risks that would cause market sentiment to
deteriorate suddenly. With public and corporate debt
near record levels in many countries, such developments
would expose vulnerabilities that have built up over the
years, dent confidence, and undermine investment—a
key driver of the baseline growth forecast.
In the medium term, risks to the growth outlook
remain skewed to the downside as they were in April.
These risks stem from a continued buildup of financial
vulnerabilities, the implementation of unsustainable
macroeconomic policies in the face of a subdued
growth outlook, rising inequality, and declining trust
in mainstream policies. A range of other noneconomic
factors continue to cloud the outlook. If any of these
risks materializes, the likelihood of other destabilizing developments could increase, amplifying negative
growth consequences. The limited policy space to
counteract downturns in advanced and emerging market economies further exacerbates concerns about these
undesirable possibilities.
20

Trade Tensions and Policy Uncertainty
Escalating trade tensions and the potential shift
away from a multilateral, rules-based trading system
are key threats to the global outlook. Discontent with
trade practices and the rules-based trading system
has led to a range of trade actions since January, as
noted in the section titled “Recent Developments.” A
cooperative approach to reduce trade costs and resolve
disagreements without raising tariff and nontariff barriers has so far proved elusive, with the United States
imposing tariffs on a variety of imports and trading
partners undertaking retaliatory measures. As discussed
in the 2018 External Sector Report, widening external imbalances in some large economies, such as the
United States—where the fiscal expansion will likely
increase the country’s current account deficit—could
further fuel protectionist sentiments. The proliferation of trade actions and threats, and the ongoing
renegotiations of major free trade agreements, such as
NAFTA and the economic arrangements between the
United Kingdom and the rest of the European Union,
have created pervasive uncertainty about future trade
costs.11 An intensification of trade tensions and the
associated further rise in policy uncertainty could dent
business and financial market sentiment, trigger financial market volatility, and slow investment and trade.
An increase in trade barriers would disrupt global
supply chains, which have become an integral part of
production processes in the past decades, and slow the
spread of new technologies, ultimately lowering global
productivity and welfare. It would also make tradable
consumer goods less affordable, harming low-income
households disproportionately. In addition to their
negative effects on domestic and global growth, protectionist policies would likely have very limited effect on
external imbalances, as discussed in the 2018 External
Sector Report.
Scenario Box 1 discusses the potential economic
consequences of further escalation in trade tensions
and rising trade barriers. Illustrative simulations
suggest that a combination of higher import tariffs by
the United States (along the lines threatened by the
US administration so far) and retaliatory measures
11As

discussed in the 2016 United Kingdom IMF Article IV
Selected Issues paper and the 2018 Euro Area IMF Article IV
Selected Issues paper, the rise in trade barriers between the United
Kingdom and the European Union would imply sizable losses for the
UK economy and, to a lesser extent, for its trading partners, with
negative impacts concentrated in countries with the largest trade
links with the United Kingdom.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

by its trading partners could inflict significant costs
on the global economy, especially through its impact
on confidence and financial conditions. According to
model simulations, global GDP would fall by more
than 0.8 percent in 2020 and remain roughly 0.4 percent lower in the long term compared with a baseline
without trade tensions. The disruption caused by an
escalation of trade restrictions could be particularly
large in the United States and China, with GDP losses
of more than 0.9 percent in the United States and
over 1.6 percent in China in 2019, and in the NAFTA
trading partners, where GDP is simulated to be more
than 1.6 percent lower in 2020 than in the absence of
tariff measures.
As discussed in the July 2018 Group of Twenty
Surveillance Note and the October 2016 WEO, such
illustrative scenarios likely understate the negative
repercussions of rising trade tensions on the global
economy. Inward-looking trade policies could come
together with tighter restrictions on the cross-border
flows of factors of production. Curbs to migration
would prevent aging economies from taking advantage
of demographic trends in other parts of the world to
ease labor supply pressures (Chapter 2 of the April
2018 WEO). The disruption to international economic
links would also make it harder for countries to tackle
cooperatively, and in a coordinated manner, the other
multilateral challenges they face, now or in the future.
Beyond trade, recent and forthcoming elections
have raised the prospect of realigned policy agendas.
Political and policy uncertainty could deter private
investment and weaken economic activity in several
countries by raising the possibility of slower reform or
of significant change to policy objectives. For example, the recent difficulties with forming a government
in Italy and the possibility of reversal of reforms or
the implementation of policies that would harm debt
sustainability triggered a sharp widening in spreads. In
Turkey, growing concerns about the credibility of the
policy agenda, underlying fundamentals, and political
tensions with the US were the main factors behind the
sharp depreciation of the Turkish lira, the decline in
asset prices, and widening spreads in August. In China,
the recent shift to a more accommodative macro policy
stance, while fine-tuning the pace of deleveraging, has
brought renewed attention to the difficult trade-off
between growth and stability that policymakers face.
These developments are consistent with an overall
increase in global economic policy uncertainty since
the start of this year (Figure 1.18). IMF staff analysis

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

suggests that 2019 and 2020 growth forecast revisions
compared with the April 2018 WEO are slightly more
negative for countries that trade extensively with the
United States—which could serve as a proxy for the
global repercussions of the uncertain direction of US
trade policy (Figure 1.18, panel 2).

Financial Tensions
After years of an extremely supportive financial
environment, the global economy remains vulnerable to a sudden tightening of financial conditions.
As discussed in the April and October 2018 GFSRs,
measures of equity valuations appear stretched in some
markets, investors have moved into riskier asset classes
in search of yield, and the share of firms with low
investment-grade ratings in advanced economy bond
indices has increased significantly. Across many economies, government and corporate debt is substantially
higher than before the global financial crisis (April
2018 Fiscal Monitor). In some emerging markets, there
are concerns about rising contingent liabilities and
increasing balance sheet mismatches. A surprise tightening of global financial conditions could expose these
vulnerabilities and derail the expansion.
As discussed in previous WEOs, various factors
could trigger a sudden change in global financial
conditions. Signs of firmer-than-expected inflation in
the United States (for example, as capacity constraints
become more binding) could lead to a shift in market
expectations of US interest rate hikes, which are currently well below those assumed in the WEO baseline
forecast. A negative shock could trigger a sudden
deterioration of risk appetite, which in turn could
lead to disruptive portfolio adjustments, accelerate
and broaden the reversal of capital flows from emerging markets, and lead to further US dollar appreciation, straining economies with high leverage, fixed
exchange rates, or balance sheet mismatches. Rising
trade tensions and political and policy uncertainty
could also make market participants abruptly reassess
fundamentals and risks. The recent turmoil in Turkey,
exacerbated by political tensions with the United States
against the backdrop of deteriorating fundamentals,
including a belated monetary policy response to
increasing inflation, exemplifies the increased salience
of this risk for other vulnerable emerging markets. In
an environment of gradually tightening global interest
rates and rising uncertainty, the likelihood of contagion from such episodes to other economies has also
International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

21

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 1.18. Policy Uncertainty and Trade Tensions
Global economic policy uncertainty has increased sharply since the beginning of
the year. Growth forecast revisions for 2019 and 2020 are slightly more negative
for countries with larger trade exposure to the United States.
400 1. Economic Policy Uncertainty1
(Index)
Global economic policy uncertainty (PPP weight)
350
US trade policy uncertainty (right scale)

600

300

400

250

300

200

200

150

100

Exports to the United States (share of GDP)

100
Jan. Apr.
2016 16

Jul.
16

Oct.
16

Jan.
17

Apr.
17

Jul.
17

Oct.
17

Jan.
18

Apr.
18

500

0
Aug.
18

0.40 2. Growth Forecast Revisions and Exports to the United States
2019 growth forecast revision
0.30
2020 growth forecast revision
0.20
0.10
0.00
y = –0.010x + 0.028
R 2 = 0.011

–0.10
–0.20
–3

y = –0.007x + 0.028
R 2 = 0.018

–2
–1
0
1
2
Growth revision from April 2018 to October 2018 (percentage points)

Sources: Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016); United Nations COMTRADE database;
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: PPP = purchasing power parity. Baker-Bloom-Davis index of Global
Economic Policy Uncertainty (GEPU) is a GDP-weighted average of national EPU
indices for 20 countries: Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, France, Germany,
Greece, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Mexico, the Netherlands, Russia, Spain,
Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
1
Mean of global economic policy uncertainty index from 1997 to 2015 = 100;
mean of US trade policy uncertainty index from 1985 to 2010 = 100.

risen. The increase in Italian sovereign yields since May
is another case in point. A significant further decline in
sovereign bond prices, with possible contagion effects,
would impose valuation losses on investors, worsen
public debt dynamics, and weaken bank balance
sheets, reigniting concerns about sovereign-bank feedback loops in the euro area.
Financial tensions could also arise from regulatory
actions. In China, where the authorities are taking
welcome steps to slow credit growth, uncoordinated
financial and local government regulatory action could
have unintended consequences that trigger disorderly
repricing of financial assets, increase rollover risks, and
22

lead to stronger-than-forecast negative effects on activity.
More broadly, an indiscriminate rollback of postcrisis
regulatory reform and oversight—both domestically and
internationally—could encourage excessive risk taking,
leading to a further buildup of financial vulnerabilities.
Cybersecurity breaches and cyberattacks on critical
financial infrastructure represent an additional source
of risk because they could undermine cross-border payment systems and disrupt the flow of goods and services.
Continued rapid growth of crypto assets could create
new vulnerabilities in the international financial system.

Other Factors
A range of other factors continues to influence the
medium-term outlook in various regions. Geopolitical
risks (Figure 1.19) and domestic strife are weighing on
the outlook in several economies, especially in the Middle East and sub-Saharan Africa. Box 1.5 documents
the depth of macroeconomic distress in several countries
(such as Libya, Venezuela, and Yemen) and compares it
to other cases of large GDP collapses in recent history.
While the baseline forecast assumes a gradual easing
of existing strains, an intensification of conflicts in
the Middle East and Africa not only would have large
negative domestic repercussions (Box 1.1 of the April
2017 WEO), but could trigger a rise in migrant flows
into Europe, potentially deepening political divisions.
In several systemically important economies, declining trust in national and regional institutions may
increase the appeal of politically popular but unsustainable policy measures, which could harm confidence,
threaten medium-term sustainability, and, in the case
of Europe, undermine regional cohesion. Furthermore,
many countries remain vulnerable to the economic and
humanitarian costs of extreme weather events and other
natural disasters, with potentially significant cross-border
ramifications through migration flows.

Fan Chart Analysis
A fan chart analysis—based on equity and commodity market data as well as the dispersion of inflation
and term spread projections of private forecasters—
shows a downward shift in the balance of risks relative
to the October 2017 WEO, as shown in Figure 1.20.
The shift is broad based—with all indicators showing
a decline in the current year extending into 2019. The
worsening of the risk profile mostly reflects anticipated
exacerbation of global trade tensions, which will weigh
on investment and growth. These measures already

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Figure 1.19. Geopolitical Risk Index

Figure 1.20. Risks to the Global Outlook

Geopolitical risks continue to trend upward.

The risks around the central global growth forecast for 2018 and 2019 have tilted
to the downside.

(Index)

300

Arab Spring:
Syrian and
Libyan wars

250

6 1. Prospects for World GDP Growth1
(Percent change)
5

Russian ISIS
actions
escalation
in Crimea

4
Syrian
civil war
escalation

200

3
2
1

150

0
2015

100

WEO baseline
50 percent conﬁdence interval
70 percent conﬁdence interval
90 percent conﬁdence interval
90 percent conﬁdence interval from October 2017 WEO
16

17

18

19
2

1.5 2. Balance of Risks Associated with Selected Risk Factors
(Coefﬁcient of skewness expressed in units of the underlying
1.0
variables)

Paris
attacks

50

0.5

0

2010

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

Aug.
18

Source: Caldara and Iacoviello (2018).
Note: ISIS = Islamic State.

appear, at least in part, to be priced into US equities,
whose risk profile has worsened. A greater likelihood
of higher energy prices adds to downside risks. Box 1.6
discusses the challenges of predicting recessions.
As discussed in the October 2018 GFSR,
growth-at-risk analysis suggests a slight increase in
short-term downside risks to global financial stability
compared with the April 2018 GFSR, and continued risks to medium-term growth that are well above
historical norms.

Policy Priorities
With risks shifting to the downside, domestic and
multilateral policies have a vital role to play in sustaining the global expansion and enhancing prospects for
strong and inclusive growth. Global growth remains
above trend but, with momentum appearing to peak,
strengthening resilience and tackling long-standing
challenges become more urgent.

Policies—Advanced Economies
In advanced economies, the macroeconomic policy stance should be tailored to the maturing cyclical

0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5

Balance of risks for
Current year
Next year
Term spread

S&P 500

Inﬂation risk

Oil market risks

Dispersion of Forecasts and Implied Volatility3
80 3.
70
60
50
40
30

GDP (right scale)
VIX (left scale)

1.4
1.2

125 4.
100

1.0
0.8

75

0.6

50

20

0.4

10

0.2

0
0.0
2006 08 10 12 14 16 Jul.
18

Term spread
(right scale)
Oil (left scale)

0.6
0.5
0.3
0.2

25

0
0.0
2006 08 10 12 14 16 Jul.
18

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE);
Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates.
1
The fan chart shows the uncertainty around the October 2018 World Economic
Outlook (WEO) central forecast with 50, 70, and 90 percent conﬁdence intervals.
As shown, the 70 percent conﬁdence interval includes the 50 percent interval, and
the 90 percent conﬁdence interval includes the 50 and 70 percent intervals. See
Appendix 1.2 of the April 2009 WEO for details. The 90 percent intervals for the
current-year and one-year-ahead forecasts from the October 2017 WEO are shown.
2
The bars depict the coefﬁcient of skewness expressed in units of the underlying
variables. The values for inﬂation risks and oil market risks enter with the opposite
sign since they represent downside risks to growth.
3
GDP measures the purchasing-power-parity-weighted average dispersion of GDP
growth forecasts for the Group of Seven economies (Canada, France, Germany,
Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States), Brazil, China, India, and Mexico. VIX
is the CBOE Standard & Poor’s (S&P) 500 Implied Volatility Index. Term spread
measures the average dispersion of term spreads implicit in interest rate forecasts
for Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Oil is the CBOE
crude oil volatility index. Forecasts are from Consensus Economics surveys.
Dashed lines represent the average values from 2000 to the present.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

23

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

position. While rising oil prices are largely responsible
for higher headline inflation, core inflation has also
been firming in the context of narrowing or closing
output gaps. Where inflation is close to or above target,
data-dependent and well-communicated monetary
normalization is appropriate. In cases where inflation is
still significantly below target, continued accommodative
monetary policy remains appropriate. As much as possible, countries should use this period of sustained growth
to rebuild fiscal buffers. Structural reforms aimed at
increasing labor productivity, labor force participation,
and flexibility of the labor market would be welcome.
Investments in physical and digital infrastructure, as well
as reduced barriers to entry in services markets, could
boost growth potential in the medium term.
Monetary Policy: Data Dependent, Well
Communicated, Country Specific
In the United States, the monetary policy stance
should be gradually tightened as inflation pressures
emerge amid solid growth and historically low unemployment. The large and procyclical fiscal stimulus
places an additional burden on the Federal Reserve
to raise policy rates to keep inflation expectations
anchored around the target and prevent the economy
from overheating. In this context, the Federal Reserve’s
continued adherence to data-dependent policymaking
and clear communication will be vital to ensuring a
smooth adjustment—both domestically and abroad.
In the United Kingdom, where the output gap is
closed and unemployment is low, a modest tightening of monetary policy may be warranted, although
at a time of heightened uncertainty, monetary policy
should remain flexible in response to changing conditions associated with the Brexit negotiations.
In the euro area and Japan, accommodative monetary policies remain appropriate. In the euro area, positive output gaps and tightening labor markets should
eventually lift inflation, but the increase is projected to
happen slowly over the forecast horizon, given a strong
backward-looking element in the inflation process.
The European Central Bank’s expectation that policy
rates will remain low through the summer of 2019,
and beyond, if necessary, together with the net asset
purchases until the end of the year (and the sizable
stock of acquired assets and the associated reinvestments), are therefore vital. In Japan, where inflation
is not expected to reach the target over the next five
years, a sustained accommodative monetary stance is
also a necessity. The Bank of Japan recently reinforced
24

its commitment to reflate the economy by introducing
forward guidance on policy interest rates and increasing flexibility of market operations to make the accommodative monetary stance more sustainable.
Fiscal Policy: Rebuild Buffers, Enhance Inclusiveness,
and Boost Medium-Term Potential
Above-trend growth in many advanced economies
offers a chance to build fiscal buffers and prepare for
the next downturn. Figure 1.21 highlights that, while
public debt is projected to decline in many of the
largest advanced economies over the next five years,
projected changes in public debt are uncorrelated with
initial debt levels.12 Procyclical fiscal stimulus should
be avoided and rolled back (for example, in the United
States), while further steps should be taken by countries with fiscal space and excess external surpluses to
boost domestic growth potential and address global
imbalances (for example, in Germany). In cases where
fiscal consolidation is appropriate, the pace of fiscal
tightening should depend on economic conditions
and avoid exerting sharp drags on demand, and efforts
should be made to reorient the composition of spending and revenues to enhance inclusiveness and protect
vulnerable people. Fiscal spending should prioritize
areas that can support growth, such as investing in
physical and digital infrastructure, boosting labor force
participation where aging threatens future labor supply,
and enhancing workforce skills.
In the United States, the tax overhaul and higher
spending will widen the fiscal deficit, which was
already set to deteriorate over the long term because
of aging-related spending. Against the backdrop of
record low unemployment rates, the deficit expansion is
providing a short-term boost to activity in the United
States and many of its trading partners, but at the cost
of elevated risks to the US and global economies. The
larger deficit not only will leave fewer budget resources
to invest in supply-side reforms, but will add to an
already-unsustainable public debt and contribute to a
rise in global imbalances. With the US economy already
operating above potential, expansionary fiscal policy
could lead to an inflation surprise, which may trigger
a faster-than-currently anticipated rise in US interest
rates, a tightening of global financial conditions, and
further US dollar appreciation, with potentially negative
12The

October 2018 Fiscal Monitor discusses the evolution of
public sector balance sheets, which provide a more comprehensive
view of the state of public finances.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Structural Policies: Boost Potential Growth
Low productivity and an aging workforce weigh
heavily on the medium-term growth prospects of
advanced economies. Reforms of product and labor
markets could boost medium-term productivity, labor
supply, and growth potential and are especially important when fiscal and monetary policy are constrained.
Reforms that strengthen education and health care
would help tackle poverty and inequality and prepare
workers for challenges arising from rapid progress in
labor-saving technologies and globalization.
In the euro area, structural reforms have attracted
much discussion in individual countries, but progress
has been mixed. France has made welcome strides in
improving labor market flexibility, and, more recently,
in legislating measures to better align workforce skills
with business needs to boost employment. Continued progress with planned reforms that aim to ease
corporate administrative burdens would also benefit
long-term growth. In Germany, policies to increase
labor supply and investment, as well as to support
entrepreneurship and advance digital transformation,

Figure 1.21. Projected Change in Public Debt

Projected change (percentage points)

Public debt in most major advanced economies is projected to decline over
2017–23, while it is projected to increase in some of the largest emerging market
and developing economies. But there is no clear relationship between the
projected change in debt ratios and the level of debt prevailing in 2017.
15 1. G20 AEs: Projected Change in Public Debt (2017–23) and
2017 Public Debt
10
USA
KOR
5
0
FRA
GBR
–5
JPN
AUS
ITA
–10
CAN
–15
DEU
–20
–25
0
50
100
150
200
250
Public debt, 2017 (percent of GDP)

Projected change (percentage points)

spillovers for the global economy. The preferred policy
course would be to increase the revenue-to-GDP ratio
through greater reliance on indirect taxes.
In the United Kingdom, the fiscal targets—which
envisage the cyclically adjusted public sector deficit
falling below 2 percent of GDP and public debt beginning to decline by 2020–21—provide an anchor for
medium-term objectives while allowing for flexibility
in the short term. The pace of fiscal consolidation can
be eased if risks materialize and growth slows sharply.
In Japan, the debt trajectory needs to be anchored
by a credible medium-term fiscal consolidation plan,
which should be based on gradual increases in the
consumption tax rate beyond the 2 percentage-point
increase envisaged for October 2019. However, in
the short term, premature fiscal tightening should be
avoided to support growth momentum and reflation.
In the euro area, countries with currently limited fiscal space (for example, France, Italy, Spain) should use
this period of above-potential growth and accommodative monetary policy to rebuild fiscal buffers, which
would help alleviate bank-sovereign strains. France’s
plan to restrain spending is a welcome step. Countries
with fiscal space, such as Germany, should fund measures that would raise potential output and facilitate
external rebalancing, for example, by increasing public
investment in physical and human capital.

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

25 2. G20 EMDEs: Projected Change in Public Debt (2017–23) and
2017 Public Debt
20
CHN
15
TUR
ZAF
BRA
10
SAU
5
RUS
0
IDN
MEX
–5
IND
ARG
–10
–15
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Public debt, 2017 (percent of GDP)
20 3. G20 AEs: Projected Public Debt Change, 2017–22
(Percentage points)
15
October 2018 WEO
October 2017 WEO
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
JPN
ITA
USA FRA
CAN GBR DEU AUS
KOR
25 4. G20 EMDEs: Projected Public Debt Change, 2017–22
(Percentage points)
20
15
10
5
0
–5
October 2018 WEO
October 2017 WEO
–10
–15
BRA IND ARG MEX ZAF CHN IDN TUR SAU RUS

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing
economies; G20 = Group of Twenty; WEO = World Economic Outlook.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

25

90

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

would all be beneficial, and should be supported with
available fiscal space—particularly in contexts such as
the current year in which the budget is in surplus. In
Italy, past pension and labor market reforms should
be preserved, and further measures should be pursued,
such as decentralizing wage bargaining to align wages
with labor productivity at the firm level. In Spain,
the structural reform agenda, which aims to raise the
effectiveness of active labor market policies and reduce
labor market segmentation, needs new impetus.
In Japan, the foremost priority should be labor market reform that could help lift productivity and wage
inflation. For example, the government’s Work Style
Reform appropriately focuses on reducing labor market
duality via the “equal pay for equal work” pillar. Boosting labor force participation rates among women and
older workers, and allowing more use of foreign labor,
would help support an aging population, but might
add to deflationary pressures in the short term and
should be tackled after the Work Style Reform.
In the United States, labor supply could be incentivized among lower-income households by increasing the
generosity of the Earned Income Tax Credit and raising
the federal minimum wage. Education reforms could
focus on expanding apprenticeships and vocational
programs to offer attractive noncollege career paths,
designing new federal financing options for tertiary
education, reducing funding differences across districts,
and offering more support to low-income areas.
In the United Kingdom, where goods and labor markets are already flexible, reforms should focus on easing
planning restrictions to boost housing supply, improving the quality of transport infrastructure, and raising
human capital among the lower skilled (such as by
raising the basic skills of high school graduates). Active
labor market policies should facilitate the relocation of
workers in industries that are likely to be more affected
by higher trade barriers after Brexit.
Financial Sector Policies: Complete Balance Sheet
Cleanup, Increase Resilience to Shocks
The potential for greater financial market volatility requires fortifying financial systems and avoiding
a rollback of the postcrisis regulatory reforms. As
discussed in the October 2018 GFSR, macroprudential
tools need to be developed and deployed, and macroprudential policy buffers need to be rebuilt, including
by raising capital buffers, to provide insurance against
a future tightening of financial conditions. In the euro
area, completing the banking union remains a prior26

ity. Continued progress with balance sheet cleanup is
essential to strengthen credit intermediation in several
economies. There is also a general need to improve
euro area banks’ cost efficiency and profitability
through proactive supervision, greater use of digitization, and revamped business models. In Japan, the
drag on bank profitability from low interest rates and
demographic headwinds could be remedied by increasing fee-based income and diversifying revenue sources,
together with consolidation. In the United States,
rising leverage, a weakening of underwriting standards
for corporate credit, the growth of passively managed
investment products, and cyber risks bear close monitoring. Changes to financial oversight should continue
to ensure that the current risk-based approach to regulation, supervision, and resolution is preserved (and
strengthened in the case of nonbanks).

Policies—Emerging Market Economies
With advanced economy interest rates expected
to increase from current still-accommodative levels and with trade tensions rising, emerging market
and developing economies need to be prepared for
an environment of higher volatility. Many need to
enhance resilience through an appropriate mix of fiscal,
monetary, exchange rate, and prudential policies to
lessen their vulnerability to tightening global financial
conditions, sharp currency movements, and reversals in
capital flows. Given subdued medium-term prospects
for per capita incomes in many countries and mounting downside risks to growth, reforms need to be
enacted to bolster growth potential and ensure that all
segments of society have access to opportunities.
Managing Trade-Offs and Enhancing Resilience
Although global financial conditions remain generally supportive from a historical perspective, continued
monetary policy normalization in the United States and
a stronger US dollar, coinciding with country-specific
factors, have put pressure on the exchange rates and
funding costs of some emerging market economies (for
example, Brazil, India, Indonesia, Mexico, South Africa,
and especially Argentina and Turkey), and have led to
further reductions in capital inflows. Policy reactions
have been varied. In addition to allowing the exchange
rate to adjust, albeit to varying degrees, countries
resorted to interest rate hikes (such as in Argentina, Indonesia, Mexico, Turkey), the activation of official financing
(for example, in Argentina), and intervention in the

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

foreign exchange market (Argentina and Brazil). The
challenges that Turkey faces will require a comprehensive
policy package comprising monetary, fiscal, quasi-fiscal,
and financial sector policies.
Monetary policy in emerging market economies
will need to manage the trade-off between supporting
activity should external financial conditions tighten
further, and keeping inflation expectations anchored. As
Chapter 3 demonstrates, firmer anchoring of inflation
expectations—fostered, for example, by credible fiscal
and monetary policy frameworks—reduces inflation
persistence and limits the pass-through of currency
depreciations to domestic prices, allowing greater leeway
for monetary policy to support output.
Turning to individual countries, monetary policy
should be tightened to reanchor expectations where
inflation continues to be high (as recently done in
Argentina), where it is increasing further in the wake
of a sharp currency depreciation (Turkey), or where
it is expected to pick up (India). Monetary policy
should instead remain accommodative in Brazil, where
unemployment remains high and inflation is gradually
increasing toward the inflation target. In Mexico, conditional on expectations remaining anchored, monetary
policy may become accommodative to support activity
once inflation is firmly on a downward path. Given
the inflation outlook, monetary policy could also be
adjusted from its moderately tight stance toward a
neutral stance in Russia. Recent tightening in Indonesia was broadly appropriate to tackle risks to inflation
from exchange rate depreciation and rising inflation
expectations. Given external uncertainty, monetary
policy may stay on hold in the immediate future, while
the impact of recent actions is assessed. In South Africa,
possible exchange rate pressures amid US monetary
policy tightening, rising risk aversion, and higher oil
prices pose upside risks to inflation.
Exchange rate flexibility can help economies absorb
external shocks, although the effects of exchange rate
depreciations on private and public sector balance
sheets and on domestic inflation expectations require
close monitoring. Under floating exchange rate
regimes, foreign exchange interventions should be limited to addressing disorderly market conditions while
protecting reserve buffers (for example, in Argentina,
Brazil, India, Indonesia, Mexico, South Africa, Turkey).
As highlighted in Chapter 2, countries with flexible
exchange rate regimes and those with lower financial
vulnerabilities experienced less damage to output in the
aftermath of the global financial crisis.

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Long-standing advice on the importance of reining in excess credit growth where needed, supporting
healthy bank balance sheets, containing maturity and
currency mismatches, and maintaining orderly market
conditions has become even more relevant in the face of
renewed market volatility. In China, it will be important, despite growth headwinds from slower credit
growth and trade barriers, to maintain the focus on
deleveraging and continue regulatory and supervisory
tightening, greater recognition of bad assets, and more
market-based credit allocation to improve resilience and
boost medium-term growth prospects. In India, reform
priorities include reviving bank credit and enhancing
the efficiency of credit provision by accelerating the
cleanup of bank and corporate balance sheets and
improving the governance of public sector banks.
Considerable progress was made in Russia in recent
years to shore up financial stability, including by closing weak banks, introducing reforms to the resolution
framework, enacting measures to reduce dollarization,
and increasing the risk weights of unsecured consumer
and mortgage loans. However, efficiency, competition,
and governance in the banking system should still be
improved. In Turkey, where significant stress is emerging in bank and corporate balance sheets, further progress should be made in strengthening bank supervision
and enhancing the crisis management framework.
In Brazil, the financial sector has proved resilient,
despite the severity of the 2015–16 recession, yet bank
credit is lagging, especially for nonfinancial firms. Key
reforms have strengthened supervision and regulation
but remaining vulnerabilities, including related-party
exposures and transactions, large exposures, country
and transfer risk, and restructured loans, still need to
be addressed and the safety net strengthened. Mexico
remains exposed to bouts of financial volatility in
global markets, given its open capital account and deep
financial integration with the rest of the world. The
exchange rate should remain the main shock absorber,
and foreign exchange intervention should only be used
to guard against disorderly market conditions. The
Flexible Credit Line provides additional insurance in
case of tail events.
South Africa has a range of buffers, including a floating exchange rate, deep financial markets, contained
foreign currency exposures, and long debt maturities.
However, significant vulnerabilities arise from large
gross external financing needs. Deepening reforms to
improve governance and the business environment
would help reduce such vulnerabilities.
International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

27

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

In Saudi Arabia, further financial development
and inclusion should be pursued while maintaining financial stability. Increased finance for small
and medium-sized enterprises; more developed debt
markets; and improved financial access, especially for
women; will support growth and equality. Reforms
should focus on removing structural impediments
that may dissuade financial institutions from entering
these markets. In Egypt, while healthy foreign reserves
and a flexible exchange rate leave the economy well
positioned to manage any acceleration in outflows,
maintenance of sound macroeconomic frameworks and
consistent policy implementation, which have led to a
successful macroeconomic stabilization, is important.
Rebuilding Fiscal Buffers
Public debt has increased in emerging markets over
the past decade, and is projected to increase further in
many of the largest economies over the next five years
(Figure 1.21). This highlights the need to preserve
and rebuild buffers. The composition of spending and
revenues should be growth friendly and protect the
most vulnerable. As shown in Chapter 2, strong fiscal
positions before the global financial crisis helped lessen
damage to GDP in its aftermath.
A gradual fiscal consolidation is needed in China
to preserve policy space and ensure broader macroeconomic sustainability. The composition of fiscal
policy should support the needed rebalancing from
investment to private consumption, and reverting to
infrastructure stimulus to boost slowing growth should
be avoided. In India, a high interest burden and risks
from rising yields also require continued focus on
debt reduction to establish policy credibility and build
buffers. These efforts should be supported by further
reductions in subsidies and enhanced compliance with
the Goods and Services Tax. Fiscal policy is appropriately geared toward rebuilding fiscal buffers in Indonesia, but untargeted subsidies should continue to be
reduced, and a medium-term strategy should be put in
place to increase the tax ratio, which is low by international standards.
Fiscal consolidation is a key priority in Brazil as
well. Pension reform is essential for securing fiscal
sustainability and ensuring fairness, given that pension expenditures are high and rising and pensions are
unduly generous for some segments of the population.
While recent measures to increase transparency are welcome, the fiscal framework needs to be strengthened,
including by increasing budget flexibility. It will also be
28

necessary to continue restraining the government wage
bill, harmonizing the federal and state tax regimes,
and improving subnational government finances, while
protecting effective social programs. A more ambitious
medium-term fiscal target in Mexico would help ensure
continued market confidence, rebuild fiscal space,
and prepare the country to better deal with long-term
demographics-related spending pressures. Significant
upfront fiscal adjustment is needed in Argentina to
lessen the federal financing burden and put public debt
on a firm downward trajectory.
Further fiscal consolidation is needed over the
medium term in Russia, and should continue in line
with the fiscal rule, to rebuild fiscal buffers in the
short term; the recent relaxation of the fiscal rule
could weaken the hard-won credibility of the authorities’ macroeconomic framework. To finance increased
spending on health, education, and infrastructure,
other spending could be reduced, alongside raising the
main value-added tax rate, strengthening tax compliance, and broadening the tax base. Parametric pension
reform could provide some fiscal space as well. Fiscal
and quasi-fiscal consolidation is also needed as part of
Turkey’s policy package. Specific measures are needed
to secure Turkey’s stated medium-term program targets,
and, on the quasi-fiscal side, public-private partnership
activity needs to be managed carefully, and state loan
guarantees should be gradually reduced and limited to
cases of clear market failures. In South Africa, a gradual
and growth-friendly fiscal consolidation will be needed
to strengthen public finances, focusing on wage savings
and complemented by measures to boost efficiency
of other current spending, including through better
targeting of education subsidies and the rationalization
of transfers to public entities.
Structural Reforms to Boost Growth
Structural reforms remain essential to raising growth
potential and spreading its benefits more widely, including through streamlining regulations and enhancing
competitiveness, investing in infrastructure and human
capital, and increasing labor market efficiencies.
Despite a growing emphasis in China on the quality
rather than the speed of growth, tensions persist
between stated development goals and intentions
to reduce leverage and allow market forces to play a
larger role in the economy. An overarching priority
is to continue with reforms, even if the economy
slows down, and to avoid a return to credit- and
investment-driven stimulus. Key elements of the

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

reform agenda should include strengthening financial
regulation and tightening macroprudential settings to
rein in the rapid increase in household debt; deepening fiscal structural reforms to foster rebalancing
(making the personal income tax more progressive and
increasing spending on health, education, and social
transfers); tackling income inequality by removing
barriers to labor mobility and strengthening fiscal
transfers across regions; more decisively reforming
state-owned enterprises; and fostering further market
liberalization, particularly in services. Addressing the
distortions that affect trade and cross-border flows is
also needed.
In India, important reforms have been implemented
in recent years, including the Goods and Services
Tax, the inflation-targeting framework, the Insolvency
and Bankruptcy Code, and steps to liberalize foreign
investment and make it easier to do business. Looking
ahead, renewed impetus to reform labor and land markets, along with further improvements to the business
climate, are also crucial. In Indonesia, the priorities
are to enhance infrastructure, streamline regulations
to boost competition and competitiveness, improve
education quality, and ease labor market regulation to
support employment.
In Brazil, recent advances in trade facilitation and
reforms of the labor and subsidized credit markets are
welcome, but more reforms are needed to boost productivity, including by improving financial intermediation,
investing in infrastructure, and effectively implementing
anti–money laundering and anticorruption measures. In
Argentina, reforms will need to ensure that the benefits
from stronger, sustained growth extend to all parts of
society by strengthening the social safety net, including
through a redesign of assistance programs.
Priority areas in Russia include improving property
rights and governance, enhancing the institutional
infrastructure, reforming labor markets, and investing
in innovation and infrastructure. Structural reforms in
Turkey should focus on increasing labor market flexibility to help lower unemployment and the output costs
of disinflation, and strengthening the business climate
to help improve the composition of external inflows
and enhance resilience.
Recent reforms in South Africa, such as measures
adopted to tackle corruption, to strengthen procurement, and in the intention to eliminate wasteful
expenditure, are welcome. However, further reforms
are needed to increase policy certainty, improve the
efficiency of state-owned enterprises, enhance flexibility

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

in the labor market, improve basic education, and align
training with business needs.

Policies—Low-Income Developing Countries
Despite an uptick in growth in 2017–18, many
low-income countries continue to face substantial risks,
including from a tightening of global financial conditions, heightened trade tensions, and domestic policy
slippages. Many continue to grapple with noneconomic challenges, such as rising temperatures, natural
disasters, and internal conflict. Low-income countries
therefore need to take advantage of the growth recovery to enact reforms that help build resilience, raise
potential growth and its inclusiveness, and move closer
toward achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
Rebuilding Fiscal Buffers and Enhancing
Financial Resilience
Despite recent narrowing of fiscal deficits as a
result of stronger fuel revenues and some fiscal consolidation efforts, public debt burdens have risen
in many low-income countries in the past several years. For oil exporters in sub-Saharan Africa,
foreign-currency-denominated public debt has increased
by as much as 80 percent from 2010–13 to 2017,
while for non-resource-intensive countries the increase
is about 18 percent over the same period (April 2018
Regional Economic Outlook: Sub-Saharan Africa). Many
low-income countries are increasingly shifting away
from traditional multilateral and bilateral sources of debt
toward bond issuances and non–Paris Club bilateral
creditors, resulting in higher debt-service costs.
Strengthening of fiscal positions is necessary to
reduce debt vulnerabilities. Fuel exporters should guard
against the temptation to let higher oil prices delay
reforms. Despite their recent recovery, oil prices are
projected to remain below the 2013 peak. Boosting
non-oil revenues and continuing fiscal consolidation
plans remain key goals for oil exporters. The focus
should be on growth-friendly fiscal adjustment, with a
shift in spending toward productive and social outlays
accompanied by frontloaded domestic revenue mobilization, through, for example, broadening the tax base
and strengthening revenue administration. Moreover,
enhancing financial resilience through proactive banking supervision, ensuring adequate provisioning for
losses by banks, and improving resolution frameworks
to keep expensive public bailouts at bay can help foster
a financial system supportive of growth.
International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

29

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 1.22. Change in the Working-Age Population (15–64)
Relative to 2015 Levels
(Millions)

By 2035 the number of people in low-income countries reaching working age
(15–64) will exceed that of the rest of the world combined.
1,000

Advanced economies
Low-income developing countries
Rest of the world
China

800
600
400
200
0

Improving education standards will be essential to
ensure that the growing pool of workers has the necessary skills.
Achieving robust growth will also require enhancing
the macroeconomic resilience of low-income countries,
including against climate change. Stronger buffers and
sound macroeconomic policy frameworks, alongside
policies and institutions that make it easier for labor and
capital to move across economic sectors and geographic
regions, are essential to that end. To reduce adverse
consequences from climate change, countries could
also invest in specific adaptation strategies that reduce
exposure and vulnerability to weather shocks, such as
climate-smart infrastructure, the adoption of appropriate technologies and regulations, and putting in place
well-targeted social safety nets that can promptly deliver
support (Chapter 3 of the October 2017 WEO).
Fostering Inclusive Growth

–200
–400
2015

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Sources: UN (2017); and IMF staff calculations.

Building More Robust and Diverse Economies
Under current policies in many low-income countries, per capita income growth is projected to remain
sluggish and below past averages. Many low-income
countries are also facing pressure to accommodate
a rapid increase in the working-age population. It
is estimated that by 2035, the number of people in
low-income countries reaching working age (15–64)
will exceed that of the rest of the world combined
(Figure 1.22). Creating enough jobs to absorb the new
entrants will be vital for welfare and social and political
stability. In this regard, economic diversification into
labor-intensive activities outside agriculture, and
away from excessive dependence on commodities for
resource-intensive exporters, is critical. While the manufacturing sector has traditionally served as a source of
well-paying jobs for low- to middle-skilled workers in
developing economies, market services sectors such as
retail, transport, telecommunications, and financial and
business services can be viable alternatives (Chapter 3
of the April 2018 WEO). Facilitating private sector
development—including by strengthening investor
rights and the rule of law, reducing the cost of doing
business, and enhancing infrastructure and openness to
trade—would help strengthen investment and growth.
30

Although inequality has declined since 2000
across sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, and Latin America,
low-income countries continue to experience significant inequality (October 2017 Fiscal Monitor). Policies
to address inequality include ensuring macroeconomic
stability to improve the sustainability of growth;
investing in physical infrastructure, especially in poor
regions; and creating an enabling environment for
competition and trade, for instance through product
market reforms that treat all market entrants equally.
Other policies entail enabling access to financial
services for low-income households and small and
medium-sized enterprises, for example by leveraging
recent developments in fintech. Finally, investments in
accessible and good-quality education, including early
childhood development, and broad-based health care
are essential.

Multilateral Policies
Avoiding protectionist reactions to structural change
and finding cooperative solutions that promote continued growth in goods and services trade will be essential
to preserve and extend the global expansion. Global
cooperation remains vital to dealing with challenges
that transcend countries’ borders and resolving disagreements that threaten the gains from international
economic integration. To preserve and broaden these
gains, countries need to work together in several areas.
•• Trade: Trade openness under a rules-based, multilateral trading system has helped diffuse innova-

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

tion, lift productivity, and expand the variety of
goods and services available globally. Policymakers
should aim to reduce trade costs further and resolve
disagreements without raising tariff and nontariff
barriers while facilitating the adjustment of those
displaced by trade and technology. Such efforts
could significantly raise global welfare, as documented in Chapter 2 of the October 2016 WEO.
To best support a strong, stable global economy,
World Trade Organization (WTO) rules and commitments should be strengthened to address areas of
growing relevance, such as services and e-commerce.
Quickly resolving the impasse over the WTO’s
Appellate Body will help ensure that existing rules
are applied and enforced. While agreements at the
global level are especially important, well-designed
and ambitious regional arrangements—such as
the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement
for Trans-Pacific Partnership—can also help. The
signing of the African Continental Free Trade Area,
and of the new Economic Partnership Agreement
between the euro area and Japan, and recent steps to
reinvigorate negotiations of the EU–China Comprehensive Agreement on Investment are encouraging.
•• Global financial stability: Cooperative global efforts
on regulatory reform have been crucial in enhancing
the safety of the financial system in the decade since
the global financial crisis, as discussed in Chapter 2
of the October 2018 GFSR, and pressures to roll
back portions of the reform should be resisted.
Key areas for more action include completing the
implementation of the reform agenda—such as fully
implementing the leverage ratio and net stable funding ratio, devising effective resolution frameworks,
and enhancing supervisory intensity for globally
important financial institutions (especially across
borders); bolstering tools and policymaking capabilities of macroprudential entities; and mitigating
systemic risk from nonbank financial institutions via
continued vigilance on the regulatory perimeter and
filling data gaps. Continued close cooperation is also
needed to confront emerging risks, such as those
arising from the growing systemic importance of
central counterparties and the potential for cybersecurity breaches, as well as to combat cross-border
money laundering and the financing of terrorism. As
global banks withdraw from high-risk lending, correspondent banking relationships—through which
global banks provide deposit‑taking and remittance
services to smaller banks in low-income countries—

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

are under pressure. These relationships play a crucial
role because they ensure that these countries have
access to vital international payments. To preserve
them, domestic regulators will need to, among other
things, address gaps in anti–money laundering and
combating the financing of terrorism where needed.
The rapid development of financial technology
offers opportunities, including for enhanced financial inclusion, but risks should also be carefully
monitored. In addition, an adequately financed
global safety net remains critical so that countries
have quick and predictable access to international
financing in times of need.
•• Migration: Immigration can relieve the strain of
aging and contribute to productivity. However,
although migrant skills typically complement those
of the native population, immigration can provoke
a political backlash. For source countries, emigration can weigh on long-term growth, including
through lost human capital, though remittances and
diaspora networks have mitigating effects. Cooperation between source and destination countries
should facilitate prompt integration of migrants
and support remittance flows. Recurrent surges in
international migration, prompted by conflicts or
climate-related events, cannot be avoided without
cooperative action to improve international security,
support low-income countries’ efforts in achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals, and resist and
adapt to climate change.
•• Excess imbalances: As discussed in the section titled
“External Sector Outlook” and the 2018 External
Sector Report, both deficit and surplus economies
must implement measures that help rebalance the
composition of global demand and prevent a further
buildup of excess global imbalances.
•• Taxation: Various features of the current international
tax system are conducive to tax avoidance. The many
possibilities that multinational enterprises have for
shifting profits to jurisdictions with low tax rates
reduce tax revenues and put downward pressure
on corporate income tax rates. The complex treaty
network can be exploited through “treaty shopping,”
which allows corporations to avoid or reduce any
withholding taxes on dividends or interest. Further
multilateral cooperation on taxation is therefore
needed to continue efforts aimed at fighting profit
shifting, such as through the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development–Group of
Twenty Base Erosion and Profit Shifting initiative. In
International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

31

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

the longer term, conceptual and practical problems,
which are intensifying as a result of globalization, may
require more fundamental reforms.
•• Other issues: A range of noneconomic factors
imperils the sustainability and inclusiveness of global
growth. Cross-border cooperation remains vital
for mitigating greenhouse gas emissions and for
containing the associated adverse consequences of
rising global temperatures and devastating climate
events. These developments disproportionately hurt

32

low-income countries that have contributed the least
to emissions and have low capacity to cope with
their effects (see Chapter 3 of the October 2017
WEO). By adding to migrant flows, climate-related
events compound an already-complex situation of
refugees fleeing conflict areas, often to countries
already under severe strain. Finally, a truly global
effort is also needed to curb corruption, which is
undermining faith in government and institutions in
many countries.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Scenario Box 1. Global Trade Tensions
The Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal Model
(GIMF) is used to simulate the economic impact of
the tariffs that have recently been imposed between
the United States and several of its trading partners as
well as some trade measures that have been announced
or considered, but not yet imposed. The simulations
capture several channels through which the rise in
trade tensions can affect global economic activity. In
addition to the direct impact of higher trade costs, the
analysis includes estimates of how the trade tensions
could affect confidence and thus firms’ investment
plans as well as how financial markets could react and
the resulting implications for firms’ cost of capital. The
scenario, which builds on the one presented in the July
2018 Group of Twenty (G20) Surveillance Note, has
been constructed with five distinct layers.
•• The first layer corresponds to measures that have
already been implemented and thus are included in
the World Economic Outlook baseline projections. It
estimates the impact of the United States imposing a 10 percent tariff on all aluminum imports, a
25 percent tariff on all steel imports, a 25 percent
tariff on $50 billion of imports from China, and a
10 percent tariff on an additional $200 billion of
imports from China that subsequently increases to
25 percent. All US trading partners are assumed to
respond and levy tariffs on an equivalent amount
of US exports, except in the case of the 10 percent
tariff on $200 billion in Chinese imports. In this
case, China is assumed to respond with an average
tariff of 7 percent on $60 billion of US imports
that rises to 17 percent when the US tariff increases
to 25 percent. The steel and aluminum tariffs
imposed by the United States are assumed to fall
exclusively on intermediate goods, while the tariff
responses by China and other US trading partners
fall on a mix of final and intermediate goods. These
tariffs are assumed to be permanent and take effect
in the second half of 2018, except for the 10 percent tariff on $200 billion of Chinese imports and
the associated retaliation, which is assumed to take
place in the fourth quarter of 2018. The increase
in the tariff from 10 to 25 percent on the $200 billion of imports from China and China’s associated
retaliation are assumed to occur in 2019.
•• The second layer estimates the impact of the
United States imposing a 25 percent tariff on a
further $267 billion of imports from China and
China responding by raising both the base that

tariffs apply to and the tariff rates such that all
goods imports from the United States also face a
25 percent tariff (roughly $130 billion in imports
from the United States). These tariffs fall on a mix
of intermediate and final goods, are assumed to be
permanent, and take effect in 2019.
•• The third layer estimates the impact of the United
States following through on the proposal to impose
a 25 percent tariff on all imported cars and car
parts (worth about $350 billion). Again, affected
US trading partners are assumed to respond with
similar tariffs on US exports of cars and car parts
as well as other goods such that they are imposing
tariffs on an equivalent amount of US exports.
These tariffs are assumed to be permanent and take
effect in 2019.
•• The fourth layer estimates the potential impact that
rising trade tensions could have on confidence and
thus firms’ investment plans. To calibrate how large
this effect might be, it uses the Baker-Bloom-Davis
overall Economic Policy Uncertainty measure and
its estimated impact on investment in the United
States.1 A one standard deviation increase in the
uncertainty measure (which is roughly one-sixth of
the change that occurred during the global financial
crisis) leads to an estimated 1 percent drop in the
level of investment in the United States in one year.
Half of this decline in US investment is assumed to
occur in 2018, with the remainder coming in 2019.
The impact of the decline in investment in other
countries is then scaled by their trade openness
relative to the United States—hence, countries more
dependent on trade see a larger fall in investment
than does the United States.
•• The final layer estimates the impact of a potential
tightening of financial conditions for corporates.
The magnitude of this tightening is based on
estimates by several financial market participants of
the impact on US corporate earnings of a worst-case
United States-versus-China trade war.2 Based on
historical relationships, this estimated 15 percent
decline in earnings is then mapped into an increase
in US corporate spreads. This rise in US spreads
1For details on the Economic Policy Uncertainty measure, see
http://​www​.policyuncertainty​.com.
2The worst-case scenario is the United States imposing tariffs
of 25 percent on all Chinese imports and China responding in a
reciprocal fashion.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

33

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Scenario Box 1 ﻿(continued)
is then mapped into corporate spreads in other
countries, based on their credit rating relative to US
corporates. This increase in spreads is assumed to
occur in 2019, with half of the increase remaining
in corporate spreads in 2020.
With regard to the room for a policy response to the
macroeconomic implications of these trade measures,
all layers assume that the euro area and Japan are
unable to ease (conventional) monetary policy further
in response to macroeconomic developments owing
to the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates.
Should additional unconventional monetary policy
measures be implemented, the decline in GDP in
Japan and the euro area would be about half as large
in the short and medium terms than estimated here.
In all other countries/regions, conventional monetary
policy responds according to a Taylor-type reaction
function. In addition, to better capture the potentially disruptive impact of tariffs on extended global
value chains, the scenario assumes that, in the short
term, firms have limited ability to substitute between
imported intermediate inputs, whether from different
countries or domestic sources. Over the long term, the
substitutability between intermediate inputs is notably
higher, on par with the substitutability between
final goods.
Before turning to the results, it is important to
note that these model simulations are illustrative of
the disruptions that an escalation in trade restrictions
could impose on the global economy, but are of
course subject to limitations. Global macroeconomic
models, such as GIMF, provide important insights
into the cross-border transmission of shocks and the
dynamic behavior of macroeconomic variables in
response to policy changes, but cannot capture some
of the sectoral distortions that the proposed trade
restrictions are likely to generate. Given the structure of the model, the impact of higher tariffs on a
specific sector of the economy—cars, for example—is
derived by assuming a (much more modest) general increase in tariffs: for instance, if cars represent
20 percent of US imports, the impact of a 20 percent
tariff on cars would be calculated as the impact of
a 4 percent tariff on all US imports (and similarly
for steel and aluminum). As a result, the sectoral
distortions imposed by tariffs are not fully captured
in the simulations. In addition, there is a high degree
of uncertainty about the magnitude and persistence

34

of both the confidence effects on investment and the
tightening of corporate spreads. These effects could
turn out to be milder or more severe than assumed
here and, in part, this motivates providing them as
separate layers. Regarding the layer that contains the
tightening of corporate spreads, one aspect that is not
included in the analysis is the potential for safe-haven
flows to mitigate the impact of the financial tightening in such countries as the United States, Germany, and Japan.
Turning to the simulated macroeconomic effects
illustrated in Scenario Figure 1, the first point to
note is that the impact of the tariffs that have been
imposed to date (blue line) is small, but material, with
the United States and China bearing the brunt of the
costs. These costs would roughly double if the United
States imposes a 25 percent tariff on an additional
$267 billion of imports from China and if China
responds with 25 percent tariffs on all US exports
(red line). Some countries, however, do benefit in the
short term, as households and firms in China and the
United States substitute away from the higher-priced
imports, now subject to tariffs, to imports from other
countries. Over time, as Chinese and US households
and firms are able to source domestically more of the
goods that were previously imported, the benefits to
other countries disappear. If the United States were
to follow through with the imposition of tariffs on
imported cars and car parts, and trading partners
respond as assumed, the negative impact on the US
economy is estimated to increase sharply (yellow line).
This is due to the large volume of imports to which
the tariffs apply and the fact that almost half are car
parts (intermediate inputs that, it is assumed, are
difficult, in the short term, to substitute away from).
For similar reasons, other countries tightly linked to
the US car market, such as its partners in the North
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and Japan,
would also see notable declines in output. As in the
previous layer, some regions temporarily benefit (in
this case China and the euro area), but once households and firms in the most affected countries have
sufficient time to make the desired substitutions, the
impact is negative everywhere. It is worth noting that
these short-term benefits could be overstated. This
arises because, as noted above, this car tariff layer
is implemented as a much smaller but broad-based
change in tariffs, which could result in overestimating

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Scenario Box 1 ﻿(continued)
Scenario Figure 1. Real GDP in Trade
Tensions Scenario
(Percent deviation from control)

Tariffs in baseline
Add China (25 percent on $267 billion) with retaliation
Add cars, trucks, and parts with retaliation
Add conﬁdence effect
Add market reaction
0.4 1. United States

2. China

0.4

0.0

0.0

–0.4

–0.4

–0.8

–0.8

–1.2

–1.2

–1.6

–1.6

–2.0
2017

20

0.4 3. Japan
0.0
–0.4
–0.8
–1.2
–1.6
–2.0
2017 20

23 Long 2017
term

20

23 Long
term

4. Euro Area

23 Long 2017 20
term
5. US NAFTA
6. World
Trading Partners
0.4
0.0
–0.4
–0.8
–1.2
–1.6
–2.0
2017 20
23 Long 2017 20
term

23 Long
term

23 Long
term

8. G20 Emerging
0.4 7. G20 Advanced
Economies
Economies
0.0
–0.4
–0.8
–1.2
–1.6
–2.0
23 Long
2017 20
23 Long 2017 20
term
term

–2.0

0.4
0.0
–0.4
–0.8
–1.2
–1.6
–2.0

the short-term substitutability between imports from
China and the euro area and those now higher-priced
tariffed goods.
Not surprisingly, if firms curtail investment, given
their concerns about the impact of a deteriorating
global trading environment, output suffers everywhere, with the impact more pronounced where
there are constraints on conventional monetary policy
(green line). Also, if financial markets respond to the
deterioration in the global trading environment by
tightening financial conditions for firms, the output
declines would be even sharper, with emerging markets
potentially suffering even more (gray line).
In the long term, once all adjustment has occurred
(colored bars), output in the United States is almost
1 percent below a baseline with no tariffs, and output
in China is just over ½ percent below baseline. The
bulk of the negative impact outside of the United
States and China is driven by the tariffs on cars and
car parts. US NAFTA partners suffer the most, with
output almost 1½ percent below baseline. In Japan,
the long-term decline in GDP is just under 0.2 percent, and it is less than 0.1 percent in the euro area.
Global GDP is down by roughly 0.4 percent in the
long term, with advanced G20 economies bearing a
slightly higher burden.

0.4
0.0
–0.4
–0.8
–1.2
–1.6
–2.0

0.4
0.0
–0.4
–0.8
–1.2
–1.6
–2.0

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: G20 = Group of Twenty; NAFTA = North American Free
Trade Agreement.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

35

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Box 1.1. Increasing Market Power
Concern over and the public policy debate about
corporate market power are both growing. Concerns
arise for at least two reasons. First, rising corporate
market power may help account for several puzzling,
and often worrisome, macroeconomic trends in
advanced economies over the past two decades—low
investment despite rising corporate profits, declining business dynamism, slow productivity growth,
and falling labor income shares (Autor and others
2017; De Loecker and Eeckhout 2017; Gutiérrez and
Philippon 2017). Second, the rise of tech giants has
raised fresh questions about whether this trend might
continue and, if so, whether some rethinking of policy
is needed to maintain fair and strong competition in
the digital age. However, corporate market power is
hard to measure, and common indicators, such as the
The authors of this box are Federico Díez, Daniel Leigh, and
Suchanan Tambunlertchai.

Figure 1.1.1. Market Power over Time

Herfindahl index or market concentration ratios, can
be misleading. Beyond the United States and select
advanced economies, evidence of how corporate market power has evolved is also scarce.
This box presents new evidence, based on data from
a large number of publicly traded firms, on trends
in corporate market power across 74 advanced and
emerging market and developing economies.1 Market
power, measured as firms’ markups—the ratio of the
price at which firms sell their output to the marginal
cost of production—has generally increased, especially
in advanced economies (Figure 1.1.1).

1The evidence presented in the box draws on Díez, Leigh,
and Tambunlertchai (2018), who calculate firm-level markups
using the approach of De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) and De
Loecker and Eeckhout (2017), and investigate the relationship
between markups, investment, innovation, and the labor share of
income at the firm level.

Figure 1.1.2. Markup Increase, by Subsector

(Estimated markups)

Basic materials
Consumer services
Health care
Oil and gas
Telecommunications

1.6 1. Advanced Economies
1.4

United States
Canada
Japan
5.0

1.2

4.5

United Kingdom
Advanced Europe
Interquartile range
85

90

95

2000

05

10

4.0

1.6 2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.4

2.5

1.5

1.0

1.0

Latin America
Emerging and developing Asia
Interquartile range
95

2000

05

10

Sources: Thomson Reuters Worldscope; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: Average markups of listed ﬁrms weighted by sales.

36

3.0

2.0

1.2

0.8
1989

3.5

16
Markup in 2016

1.0
0.8
1980

Consumer goods
Financials
Industrials
Technology
Utilities

0.5
0.6
16

0.8

1.0
1.2
Markup in 1980

1.4

Sources: Thomson Reuters Worldscope; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: Dashed line indicates 45-degree line along which
markups are equal over time.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

1.6

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Box 1.1 (continued)
Figure 1.1.1 unveils two clear facts. First, markups among advanced economies have significantly
increased since the 1980s, by 43 percent on average,
and this trend has accelerated during the current
decade. Second, emerging market and developing
economies show less evidence of a rise in markups.2
The pattern of rising markups in advanced economies is found across all broad economic sectors.
Figure 1.1.2 presents, for each narrowly defined economic subsector, the markup in 2016 compared with
that in 1980, where the color refers to the corresponding 10 broad FTSE Russell Industry Classification
Benchmark economic sectors. In the figure, a colored
marker located above the 45-degree line indicates an
increase in markups. Markups increased across almost
all narrow sectors, but there is significant heterogeneity in the magnitudes of the increases. Markups more
than doubled in the biotechnology, retail real estate
investment trusts (retail REITs), consumer finance,
2This

increase, documented by Díez, Leigh, and Tambunlertchai (2018), is also consistent with the findings by De Loecker
and Eeckhout (2018). Furthermore, the increase in markups is
accompanied by an increase in profits, strengthening the notion
of increased corporate market power.

and software subsectors. In contrast, subsectors, such
as auto parts, computer hardware, and electrical
components and equipment, saw markups decline. So,
while markups have generally increased since 1980,
much cross-sector heterogeneity is observed.

Figure 1.1.4. Advanced Economies:
Distribution of Markups of Firms, by Industry
(Kernel density)

2016

1980

4 1. Oil and Gas

2. Basic Materials

3

3

2

2

1

1

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

4 3. Industrials

2.5

2.0

1.5

2

1

1

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

0

0.0

1

2

3

4

Sources: Thomson Reuters Worldscope; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: X-axis truncated at 5 for graphical clarity.

5

3

4

0
5
4
3
2

1

1
1

2

3

4

5

1

0

2

3

4

0
5

8. Utilities

4
3

2

2

1

1
1

2

3

4

5

0

1

2

3

4

0
5
4

10. Technology

3

3

2

2

1

1

0
0
0

2

6. Consumer
Services

4 9. Financials

0.5

1

2

0
0
1.0

4

3

2

4 7. Telecommunications
3

1980

4. Consumer Goods

2

3

0
0

2016

0
5

1

3

3

(Kernel density)

4

0

4 5. Health Care

Figure 1.1.3. Advanced Economies:
Distribution of Markups of All Firms

4

1

2

3

4

5

0

1

2

3

4

0
5

Sources: Thomson Reuters Worldscope; and IMF staff
estimates.
Note: Results for 10 “industries” of the FTSE Russell
Industrial Classiﬁcation Benchmark from Thomson Reuters
Worldscope. X-axis truncated at 5 for graphical clarity.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

37

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Box 1.1 (continued)
More in-depth analysis shows that the increase in
market power in advanced economies is mostly driven
by a fraction of “superstar” firms that have managed
to extract especially large markups, while the market
power of other firms has increased little since 1980.
This fact implies that the rise in markups has been
accompanied by an increasingly skewed distribution,
not only at the aggregate level, but also within broad
economic sectors (Figures 1.1.3 and 1.1.4).
This increase in corporate market power has important macroeconomic effects. Most strikingly, starting
from low levels, higher markups are initially associated
with increasing investment and innovation, but this
relationship becomes negative when market power
becomes too strong. The inverted U-shape relationship
between competition on one hand and investment and
innovation on the other is consistent with findings by

38

Aghion and others (2005) and suggests that, at low
levels of market power, firms invest to escape competition, whereas, at high levels of market power, firms
have weaker incentives to invest because of the lack of
competitive pressure. Furthermore, higher corporate
market power also seems to be associated with lower
labor shares: the fraction of firms’ revenue going to
workers decreases, while the share of revenue going to
profits increases.
The ultimate policy implications will depend on
the drivers of this increase in global market power,
which are still being debated. The potential causes
include, among others, the rise of intangible assets (for
example, patents), network effects in the digital economy (see April 2018 Fiscal Monitor), and outdated or
weaker enforcement of antitrust laws. More research is
needed to disentangle the various factors at play.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Box 1.2. Growth Outlook: Advanced Economies
Advanced economies are projected to expand by
2.4 percent in 2018 (a marginally faster pace than in
2017) and 2.1 percent in 2019. Growth in advanced
economies is expected to decline to 1.7 percent in
2020 as the US tax cuts are partially reversed, and to
1.5 percent in the medium term as working-age population growth continues to slow.
•• Growth in the United States is expected to peak
at 2.9 percent in 2018, supported by the procyclical fiscal stimulus after eight consecutive years
of expansion and still-loose financial conditions
(despite expected monetary tightening). Growth is
expected to soften to 2.5 percent in 2019 (a downward revision of 0.2 percentage point relative to the
April 2018 World Economic Outlook (WEO) due to
the recently introduced trade measures) and to drop
to 1.8 percent in 2020 as the fiscal stimulus begins
to unwind. Strong domestic demand is projected
to push the economy above full employment and
increase imports and the current account deficit.
Medium-term growth is forecast to temporarily
decline below potential at 1.4 percent as the positive output gap is gradually closed.
•• Growth is projected to remain strong in the euro
area, but has been revised down by 0.4 percentage point to 2.0 percent for 2018, reflecting
weaker-than-expected performance in the first half
of the year. Growth is forecast to gradually slow
further to 1.9 percent in 2019, 0.1 percentage point
lower than the April forecast. Healthy consumer
spending and job creation amid supportive monetary policy are expected to continue to provide
strong aggregate demand, though at a moderating pace. Short-term profiles of country-specific
growth rates vary. In France, growth is expected to
moderate to 1.6 percent in 2018 and 2019, 0.5
(0.4) percentage point weaker than in the April
2018 WEO for 2018 (2019), reflecting softer
external demand as well as lower outturns and
high-frequency indicators in 2018. In Germany,
growth was revised down to 1.9 percent in 2018
and 2019 (by 0.6 percentage point and 0.1 percentage point, respectively) because of a slowdown
in exports and industrial production. Italy’s growth
forecast is also lower than in the April 2018 WEO,
estimated at 1.2 percent for 2018 and 1 percent
The author of this box is Natalija Novta.

in 2019, because of the underlying deterioration
in external and domestic demand and uncertainty
about the new government’s policy agenda. In
Spain, growth is expected to be 2.7 percent in 2018
and 2.2 percent in 2019, which is a 0.1 percentage
point decline relative to the April forecast for 2018,
and no change for 2019. Medium-term growth
in the euro area, projected at about 1.4 percent, is
expected to be constrained by slow productivity
growth and unfavorable demographics.
•• In the United Kingdom, growth is projected to slow
to 1.4 percent in 2018 and 1.5 percent in 2019
(from 1.7 percent in 2017). This forecast represents
a downward revision of 0.2 percentage point for
2018 relative to the April 2018 WEO, driven by
weak growth in the first quarter of the year, partly
due to weather-related factors. The medium-term
growth forecast remains at 1.6 percent, weighed
down by the anticipated higher barriers to trade
following Brexit. (Assumptions regarding the Brexit
outcome remain broadly unchanged relative to
the April 2018 and October 2017 WEOs. Tariffs
on trade with the European Union are expected
to remain at zero, and nontariff costs will likely
increase moderately.)
•• Japan’s growth is projected to moderate to 1.1 percent in 2018 (from a strong, above‑trend outturn of
1.7 percent in 2017), before softening to 0.9 percent in 2019. The downward revision of 0.1 percentage point for 2018 relative to the April 2018
WEO is largely due to the contraction observed in
the first quarter of 2018, and given the uptick in
growth and domestic demand in the second quarter
of 2018, this is likely to represent a temporary dip
rather than the beginning of a turn in the cycle.
Japan’s medium-term prospects are impeded by
unfavorable demographics and a trend decline in
the labor force.
•• Among other advanced economies, growth is
projected to moderate in Canada to 2.1 percent
in 2018 and 2.0 percent in 2019, and to exceed
3 percent in Australia in 2018, before declining to
2.8 percent in 2019. In Korea, growth is projected
at 2.8 percent in 2018 and 2.6 percent in 2019.
The downward revisions to the 2019 growth
forecast for Australia and Korea relative to the April
2018 WEO partially reflect the negative effect of
the recently introduced trade measures.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

39

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Box 1.3. Growth Outlook: Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Growth in emerging market and developing economies is expected to remain steady at 4.7 percent in
2018–19, and to rise modestly over the medium term.
•• In China, growth is projected to moderate from
6.9 percent in 2017 to 6.6 percent in 2018 and
6.2 percent in 2019, reflecting slowing external
demand growth and necessary financial regulatory
tightening. The 0.2 percentage point downgrade
to the 2019 growth forecast is attributable to the
negative effect of recent tariff actions, assumed to be
partially offset by policy stimulus. Over the medium
term, growth is expected to gradually slow to 5.6 percent as the economy continues to make the transition
to a more sustainable growth path with continued
financial de-risking and environmental controls.
•• Growth is projected to remain strong elsewhere
in emerging and developing Asia. India’s growth
is expected to increase to 7.3 percent in 2018 and
7.4 percent in 2019 (slightly lower than in the
April 2018 World Economic Outlook [WEO] for
2019, given the recent increase in oil prices and
the tightening of global financial conditions), up
from 6.7 percent in 2017. This acceleration reflects
a rebound from transitory shocks (the currency
exchange initiative and implementation of the
national Goods and Services Tax), with strengthening investment and robust private consumption.
India’s medium-term growth prospects remain
strong at 7¾ percent, benefiting from ongoing
structural reform, but have been marked down
by just under ½ percentage point relative to the
April 2018 WEO. In the ASEAN-5 (Indonesia,
Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam), growth
is expected to be 5.3 percent in 2018, before
softening to 5.2 percent in 2019. The 0.2 percentage point downward revision to the 2019 growth
forecast reflects largely the economic costs of recent
trade measures.
•• Growth in Latin America and the Caribbean is
projected to decrease from 1.3 percent in 2017 to
1.2 percent in 2018 and to rise to 2.2 percent in
2019, a more subdued recovery than envisaged in
the April 2018 WEO.
oo Mexico’s growth is projected to increase from
2.0 percent in 2017 to 2.2 percent in 2018
and 2.5 percent in 2019, supported by higher
US growth. The growth forecast is, however,
The authors of this box are Wenjie Chen and Zsóka Kóczán.

40

lower than expected in the April 2018 WEO,
reflecting the impact on investment and
domestic demand of prolonged uncertainty
related to trade.
oo Brazil’s economy is expected to grow at 1.4 percent and 2.4 percent in 2018 and 2019, respectively, up from 1 percent growth in 2017, driven
by a recovery of private demand as the output
gap gradually closes. The growth forecast for
2018 is lower than in the April 2018 WEO by
0.9 percentage point on account of disruptions
caused by the nationwide truck drivers’ strike and
tighter external financial conditions, which are a
source of risk to the outlook. Growth is expected
at 2.2 percent in the medium term.
oo After growing by 2.9 percent in 2017, Argentina
is expected to contract by 2.6 percent in 2018,
a large downward revision relative to the April
2018 WEO forecast, reflecting recent financial
market disruptions, high real interest rates, and
the faster fiscal consolidation under the exceptional access Stand-By Arrangement approved in
June. The economy is expected to contract by a
further 1.6 percent in 2019. Growth of 3.2 percent is expected over the medium term under the
steady implementation of reforms and returning confidence.
oo Venezuela’s economy continues to decline for the
fifth consecutive year, following a 14 percent
drop in 2017. Real GDP is projected to shrink
by 18 percent in 2018 and a further 5 percent in
2019, driven by plummeting oil production, and
political and social instability.
•• The outlook for the Commonwealth of Independent
States is more favorable than in the April 2018
WEO, with growth for the region expected at
2.3 percent in 2018 and 2.4 percent in 2019 (up
from 2.1 percent in 2017), moderating to 2.1 percent in the medium term. Growth in Russia is
projected at 1.7 percent in 2018, up from 1.5 percent in 2017, supported by higher oil prices and
recovering domestic demand. Medium-term growth
is expected to remain muted at about 1.2 percent,
absent structural reforms. Growth projections for
Kazakhstan have been revised upward to 3.7 percent
in 2018 and 3.1 percent in 2019, reflecting higher
non-oil growth and increased oil production.
•• Growth in emerging and developing Europe is
projected to moderate from 6.0 percent in 2017

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Box 1.3 (continued)
to 3.8 percent in 2018 and decline further to
2.0 percent in 2019 (well below the April 2018
WEO forecasts). Poland is in a strong cyclical
upswing, with growth projected at 4.4 percent in
2018 (revised up by 0.3 percentage point since the
April 2018 WEO, reflecting stronger-than-expected
investment growth), though it is expected to moderate to 3.5 percent in 2019 and 2.8 percent in the
medium term, held back by adverse demographics
and structural bottlenecks. Romania’s economy grew
at a robust 6.9 percent in 2017 on fiscal stimulus
and strong external demand. Growth is expected to
decline to 4 percent in 2018 and further to 3.4 percent in 2019 (1.1 and 0.1 percentage points lower
than in the April 2018 WEO) as the stimulus moderates. Growth in Turkey was very strong in 2017
and early 2018, but is expected to slow sharply. Real
GDP growth is projected at 3.5 percent in 2018
but to drop to 0.4 percent in 2019 (some 3.6 percentage points lower for 2019 than in the April
2018 WEO) as the weaker lira, higher borrowing
costs, and elevated uncertainty weigh on investment
and consumer demand. Turkey’s economy remains
highly vulnerable to sudden shifts in capital flows
and geopolitical risks.
•• Growth is on the mend for sub-Saharan Africa,
with the region’s average growth projected to rise
to 3.1 percent in 2018 (from 2.7 percent in 2017)
and 3.8 percent in 2019. The growth forecast for
2018 is 0.3 percentage point lower than the April
2018 WEO forecast. The acceleration relative
to 2016–17 reflects a more supportive external
environment, including stronger global growth,
higher commodity prices, and improved capital
market access, following efforts to improve fiscal
balances in the aftermath of the commodity price
slump. Growth performance varies, however, across
countries. About half of the expected pickup in
growth between 2017 and 2018 reflects the growth
rebound in Nigeria. Nigeria’s growth is projected to
increase from 0.8 percent in 2017 to 1.9 percent in
2018 and 2.3 percent in 2019 (0.4 percentage point
higher than in the April 2018 WEO for 2019),
buoyed by the impact of recovering oil production
and prices. In Angola, the region’s second largest oil
exporter, real GDP is expected to shrink by 0.1 percent in 2018, following a 2.5 percent contraction in
2017, but is projected to increase by 3.1 percent in
2019, with the recovery driven by a more efficient
foreign currency allocation system and additional

availability of foreign currency due to higher oil
prices. Meanwhile, in South Africa, prospects remain
modest amid uncertainty in the run-up to the 2019
general elections, with growth projected to fall to
0.8 percent in 2018 from 1.3 percent in 2017,
before recovering to 1.8 percent in the medium
term. The pace of structural reform implementation
and the level of policy credibility will determine the
extent of economic recovery.
•• In the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan region, growth is projected to increase from
2.2 percent in 2017 to 2.4 percent in 2018 and to
2.7 percent in 2019, stabilizing at about 3 percent
in the medium term—a sizable downward revision
compared with the April 2018 WEO forecast. The
downward revisions reflect to an important extent
the worsening of growth prospects for Iran, following the reimposition of US sanctions. The economy
is now forecast to contract in 2018 (−1.5 percent)
and especially in 2019 (−3.6 percent) on account
of reduced oil production, before returning to
modest positive growth in 2020–23. Elsewhere, in
Saudi Arabia, following a 0.9 percent contraction in
2017, output is projected to expand by 2.2 percent
in 2018 and 2.4 percent in 2019 (0.5 percentage
point higher for both years than in the April 2018
WEO), driven by a pickup in non-oil economic
activity and a projected increase in crude oil production in line with the revised Organization of
the Petroleum Exporting Countries Plus agreement.
Growth in Egypt is projected to rise to 5.3 percent
in 2018 and 5.5 percent in 2019, up from 4.2 percent in 2017, reflecting a recovery in tourism, rising
natural gas production, and continued improvements in confidence due to implementation of an
ambitious reform program supported by the IMF’s
Extended Fund Facility. Growth in Pakistan is
expected to strengthen from 5.4 percent in 2017 to
5.8 percent in 2018 (0.2 percentage point higher
than in the April 2018 WEO), underpinned by
improved energy supply, investment related to the
China-Pakistan Economic Corridor, and strong
credit growth. However, macroeconomic stability
gains have been eroding, putting the outlook at risk.
Growth is expected to moderate to 4.0 percent in
2019, and slow to about 3.0 percent in the medium
term. The medium-term growth revisions for
Pakistan, together with those for Iran and a sizable
markdown in prospects for Sudan, explain the lower
projected growth for the region beyond 2019.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

41

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Box 1.4. Inflation Outlook: Regions and Countries
Inflation in advanced economies is projected at
2.0 percent in 2018, up from 1.7 percent in 2017.
Inflation in emerging market and developing economies
excluding Venezuela is expected to increase to 5.0 percent
this year, up from 4.3 percent in 2017. These weighted
averages mask significant heterogeneity across countries
depending on their cyclical positions as well as the impact
of currency depreciations and rising energy prices.

Advanced Economies
•• In the United States, headline consumer price inflation
is projected to increase to 2.4 percent in 2018 and
2.1 in 2019, from 2.1 percent in 2017. Core personal
consumption expenditure price inflation, the Federal
Reserve’s preferred measure, is expected to be 2.1 percent in 2018 and 2.3 percent in 2019 compared with
1.6 percent in 2017, as output climbs above potential
following the sizable fiscal expansion. This projection
slightly exceeds current Federal Reserve projections
and suggests earlier-than-anticipated overshooting of
the Federal Reserve’s target inflation rate. Toward the
end of the projection horizon (2022–23), inflation is
assumed to decline to the target, thanks to a monetary policy response that will keep expectations and
actual inflation well anchored.
•• Headline inflation in the euro area is expected to be
1.7 percent in 2018 and 2019. With the recovery
boosting growth above potential for 2018–19, core
inflation is expected to increase to 1.2 percent in
2018 and 1.6 percent in 2019, up from 1.1 percent
in 2017. The core harmonized index of consumer
prices is projected to increase slowly to 2 percent by
2022, given a strong backward-looking element in
the euro area inflation process.
•• In Japan, headline inflation is expected to increase to
1.2 percent in 2018, up from 0.5 percent in 2017,
again mainly due to rising global energy prices. Inflation excluding fresh food and energy prices is expected
to rise to 0.5 percent in 2018 and further to 0.8 percent in 2019, up from 0.1 percent in 2017. Inflation
is still expected to remain below the Bank of Japan’s
target over the five-year forecast horizon, given tepid
wage growth and stickiness in inflation expectations.
•• In the United Kingdom, as the pass-through effects
of the pound depreciation fade, core inflation is
expected to decline to 2.1 percent in 2018, down from
2.4 percent in 2017, and is expected to stabilize at its
medium-term level of 2.0 percent in early 2020. Headline inflation is expected to edge down to 2.5 percent
The authors of this box are Wenjie Chen, Zsóka Kóczán, and
Natalija Novta.

42

in 2018, from 2.7 percent in 2017, with a gradual
convergence to 2 percent projected in 2020.

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
•• Headline inflation in China is expected to pick up to
2.2 percent this year, up from 1.6 percent in 2017, and
to about 3 percent over the medium term, driven by
higher food and energy prices. Inflation in India is on
the rise, estimated at 3.6 percent in fiscal year 2017/18
and projected at 4.7 percent in fiscal year 2018/19,
compared with 4.5 percent in fiscal year 2016/17, amid
accelerating demand and rising fuel prices.
•• In Mexico, inflation is projected to continue to fall—to
4.8 percent in 2018—and to converge toward the central bank’s 3 percent target in 2020, as monetary policy
remains tight. In contrast, inflation is projected to
accelerate in Brazil to 3.7 percent in 2018 and 4.2 percent in 2019, as monetary policy remains supportive
and food price inflation rebounds after a notable drop
caused by an exceptional harvest in 2017. In Argentina,
inflation is expected to reach 31.8 percent in 2018,
driven by the significant currency depreciation, and
to remain at broadly the same level (31.7 percent) in
2019. Venezuela’s hyperinflation is expected to worsen
rapidly, fueled by monetary financing of large fiscal
deficits and loss of confidence in the currency.
•• Russia’s inflation, expected to average 2.8 percent
in 2018, is below the target of 4 percent, driven by
moderately tight monetary policy. However, it is
projected to rise to 5.1 percent in 2019, supported by
an ongoing recovery in domestic demand, higher fuel
prices, and pass-through from the recent depreciation.
Turkey’s inflation is projected at 15 percent in 2018
and 16.7 percent in 2019, reflecting pass-through from
the lira’s depreciation, higher energy prices, high wage
growth, and unanchored inflation expectations.
•• Inflation pressures in sub-Saharan Africa have
broadly softened, with annual inflation projected
to drop to 8.6 percent in 2018 and 8.5 percent in
2019, from 11 percent in 2017. In South Africa,
inflation has moderated to 4.8 percent in 2018 from
5.3 percent in 2017 with the easing of drought conditions, but is expected to edge back to 5.3 percent
in 2019 as temporary disinflationary effects subside.
In Nigeria and Angola, tighter monetary policy and
moderation in food price increases contributed to
tapering inflation. In Nigeria, inflation is projected
to fall to 12.4 percent in 2018, from 16.5 percent
in 2017, and to rise to 13.5 percent in 2019. In
Angola, inflation is projected to fall to 20.5 percent
in 2018 from 29.8 percent in 2017 and to decline
further to 15.8 percent in 2019.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Box 1.5. Sharp GDP Declines: Some Stylized Facts
A number of countries, including Greece, have
suffered very large declines in GDP per capita in the
aftermath of the global financial crisis. In some countries affected by conflict, such as Libya, South Sudan,
Syria, and Yemen, ongoing declines in GDP per capita
have been staggering.1 In Venezuela, GDP per capita
is estimated to have declined by more than 35 percent
over 2013–17 and is projected to decline by close to
60 percent between 2013 and 2023. Are these episodes
rare occurrences? To address this question, this box
documents the frequency and characteristics of large
declines in GDP per capita over the past 50 years. It
shows that such episodes are unfortunately not rare.
They tend to be protracted and originate from a variety of sources, and the post-trough recovery, in many
cases, is insufficient to even restore the starting level of
GDP per capita.
The chosen threshold (a decline in GDP per capita
of at least 20 percent from peak to trough) is designed
to isolate extreme episodes, typically occurring over
several years, rather than more frequent cases of
macroeconomic distress (caused, for example, by a
financial or exchange rate crisis).
There is a vast literature on the macroeconomic
implications of different types of crises (financial,
external, currency, banking, fiscal). While these crises
are typically associated with severe macroeconomic
distress, such distress rarely causes a decline in the level
of GDP exceeding 20 percent. The literature on large
GDP declines is relatively small. An important study
in this respect is by Becker and Mauro (2006), who
examine output drops in a large panel of countries
and systematically relate them to a variety of shocks
(terms-of-trade declines, financial shocks, wars, and
so on). A related literature looks at large declines in
GDP and consumption (“disasters”) with the objective of calibrating the impact of these rare events on
financial market variables such as equity premiums
(see, for instance, Barro and Ursua 2008; Barro and
Jin 2011; Nakamura and others 2013). These studies
typically rely on long time series data (stretching to the

The author of this box is Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti.
for Syria since the start of the conflict are not available,
but estimates presented in Gobat and Kostial (2016) and
WB (2017) point to a dramatic collapse in GDP exceeding
50 percent.
1Data

early 19th century) for advanced economies and a few
emerging markets.2
There are four main causes, often intertwined, of
GDP declines in the sample under consideration.
These include strife (war, civil war, armed rebellion),
commodity shocks,3 crises (including banking crises,
external crises, and so on), and the transition from a
centrally planned to a market economy. Misguided
macroeconomic policies during the episodes play a role
in a number of cases as well, often interacting with
other factors. Prime examples are cases of hyperinflation, including the ongoing case of Venezuela.
Declines attributable to other causes (for example,
natural disasters) are much less frequent—the one
example in the sample is the 2015 Ebola epidemic in
Sierra Leone.

Stylized Facts on Sharp GDP Declines
The 133 episodes of large GDP per capita declines
identified in the period 1960–2017 are listed in
Table 1.5.1.4
They affect 92 countries (a number of them repeatedly).5 Figure 1.5.1 depicts the number of ongoing
episodes of sharp declines in GDP per capita by year,
as well as the share of countries affected (in relation
to the total number with available data). The figure
indicates that the lion’s share of episodes took place
during the 1980s, following the global economic
2Applying the same definition of output declines to the Barro
and Ursua (2008) data set yields episodes concentrated around
the two World Wars and the Great Depression.
3The “shock” can be a decline in a country’s export prices
(such as oil price declines affecting fuel exporters), or a decline
in domestic production (for instance, declining oil production in
Timor-Leste in recent years or dwindling phosphate deposits in
Kiribati in the 1970s).
4It should be kept in mind that data availability is spotty for
the earlier part of the sample and that data limitations are severe,
particularly for low-income countries. These limitations can
become even more severe during periods of distress, such as those
studied in this box.
5The length of an episode is measured as the number of years
between a peak in GDP per capita and its subsequent trough,
as long as the peak-to-trough decline in GDP per capita is at
least 20 percent. If GDP per capita falls substantially below a
previous trough within a few years of that trough the episode
is deemed a continuation of the preceding one. Otherwise, the
episode is potentially considered a distinct one (as long as GDP
per capita falls by at least 20 percent between the new peak and
the new trough).

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

43

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Box 1.5 (continued)
Table 1.5.1. Episodes of Declines in GDP per Capita Exceeding 20 Percent
Peak
1989
1960
1974
2006
1974
1988
2007
1980
1998
1990
1990
1969
1978
1970
1990
1977
1979
1991
1986
1977

Trough
1992
1962
1994
2012
1982
1994
2011
1990
2002
1993
1995
1975
1986
1972
1995
1986
1993
2005
1994
1983

Central African
Republic

1986

1996

530

–24

Central African
Republic

2012

2013

476

–37

Chad
Chad
Chile
China
Comoros
Congo, Democratic
Republic of the

1962
1977
1971
1960
1984
1974

1973
1981
1975
1962
1999
1983

715
593
5,001
192
938
1,134

–25
–32
–22
–31
–20
–29

Congo, Democratic
Republic of the

1986

2002

832

–67

Congo, Republic of
Côte d’Ivoire
Cuba
Cyprus
Djibouti
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gabon
Gabon
Georgia
Ghana
Ghana
Greece

1984
1978
1985
1973
1990
1978
1980
2008
1997
1987
1976
1984
1998
1990
1971
1978
2007

1999
1994
1993
1975
2001
1986
1991
2017
2008
1992
1982
1987
2009
1994
1976
1983
2013

3,292
2,392
4,480
11,321
1,932
3,157
646
20,334
622
223
19,493
12,666
11,926
3,525
1,121
960
30,055

–31
–47
–38
–33
–37
–35
–25
–44
–24
–27
–40
–26
–29
–73
–20
–27
–26

Albania
Algeria
Andorra
Andorra
Angola
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Argentina
Armenia
Azerbaijan
The Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Belarus
Bolivia
Brunei Darussalam
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African
Republic

44

GDP per
Percent
capita change in GDP
at peak
per capita
2,193
–41
2,466
–34
44,648
–27
49,708
–23
3,029
–31
2,248
–41
15,467
–24
8,053
–26
8,729
–22
1,797
–51
3,119
–61
27,539
–39
21,788
–24
406
–22
3,102
–35
1,745
–26
66,002
–44
338
–35
1,834
–42
625
–22

Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Iran
Iran
Iraq
Iraq
Iraq
Jamaica
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kiribati
Kiribati
Kuwait
Kuwait
Kuwait
Kuwait
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lebanon
Lebanon
Lebanon
Liberia
Liberia
Libya
Libya
Libya
Libya
Macao SAR
Madagascar
Malawi
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Moldova
Mongolia
Mozambique
Myanmar
Nicaragua
Nicaragua
Niger
Niger
Niger
Nigeria
Nigeria
Papua New Guinea
Papua New Guinea
Peru
Qatar
Russian Federation
Rwanda

Peak
1997
1976
1980
1976
1983
1980
1990
1999
1972
1986
1990
1975
1984
1971
1979
1989
1993
2007
1990
1973
1981
1987
1979
2002
1979
1991
2010
2012
2013
1971
1979
1972
1995
1970
1992
1989
1981
1985
1977
1981
1965
1979
1988
1965
1977
1973
1994
1987
1973
1990
1962

Trough
1999
1984
1994
1981
1988
1985
1991
2003
1980
1991
1995
1981
1995
1975
1982
1991
2001
2017
1995
1976
1982
1989
1995
2003
1988
2002
2011
2016
2016
2002
1994
1978
1999
1994
1999
1993
1986
1988
1979
1993
1976
1984
2000
1968
1987
1990
2003
1992
1991
1998
1964

GDP per
Percent
capita change in GDP
at peak
per capita
732
–30
2,156
–28
1,106
–38
10,266
–57
5,557
–34
3,346
–22
4,079
–65
4,379
–42
5,368
–32
3,270
–28
5,890
–37
4,521
–54
2,225
–27
84,352
–26
64,424
–50
32,605
–33
49,737
–30
49,589
–32
1,096
–51
10,752
–71
5,653
–37
8,287
–59
1,575
–93
395
–31
24,382
–61
12,012
–30
12,121
–62
10,209
–43
72,184
–28
755
–50
417
–24
2,645
–26
3,176
–22
1,296
–25
1,611
–41
1,856
–27
195
–33
240
–20
2,565
–36
1,704
–38
716
–37
545
–31
408
–21
1,459
–25
2,040
–44
1,943
–23
2,105
–23
3,791
–31
115,147
–67
9,534
–42
340
–24
(continued)

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Box 1.5 (continued)
Table 1.5.1. (continued)
GDP per
Percent
GDP per
Percent
capita change in GDP
capita change in GDP
Peak Trough at peak
per capita
Peak Trough at peak
per capita
Rwanda
1992
1994
401
–49
Togo
1980
1983
683
–21
San Marino
2008
2015
84,794
–38
Togo
1989
1993
561
–27
São Tomé and
1980
1993
1,352
–36
Trinidad and Tobago
1982
1989
9,856
–34
Príncipe
Turkmenistan
1990
1997
3,713
–49
Saudi Arabia
1974
1987
39,125
–60
Uganda
1970
1980
407
–30
Senegal
1961
1994
1,083
–27
Ukraine
1990
1998
3,965
–57
Sierra Leone
1982
2001
502
–45
United Arab Emirates 1970
1978
126,104
–26
Sierra Leone
2014
2015
563
–22
United Arab Emirates 1980
1988
113,682
–50
Solomon Islands
1979
1986
1,643
–24
United Arab Emirates 1997
2010
64,176
–45
Solomon Islands
1995
2002
1,655
–36
Uruguay
1981
1984
7,420
–21
South Sudan
2011
2012
3,111
–54
Uzbekistan
1990
1996
997
–27
South Sudan
2013
2017
1,789
–26
Venezuela
1977
1985
15,557
–24
St. Vincent and the
1972
1975
2,319
–28
Venezuela
1997
2003
12,787
–24
Grenadines
Venezuela
2012
2017
14,474
–37
Sudan
1962
1973
900
–22
West Bank and Gaza
1999
2002
2,683
–23
Sudan
1977
1985
984
–28
Yemen
2010
2017
1,309
–70
Suriname
1978
1987
8,724
–38
Zambia
1972
1994
1,613
–44
Tajikistan
1990
1996
1,278
–71
Zimbabwe
1974
1978
1,347
–21
Timor-Leste
2012
2014
4,058
–37
Zimbabwe
1998
2008
1,348
–56
Source: IMF staff calculations based on data from the World Economic Outlook and World Bank World Development Indicators databases.
Note: Peak indicates the year before the decline in GDP per capita begins, and trough the year in which GDP per capita is at the lowest level in the
episode. GDP per capita at peak indicates GDP per capita in constant 2010 US dollars the year before the decline starts (source: World Bank). “Percent
change in GDP per capita” indicates the percent change in per capita GDP from peak to trough.

downturn and the 1982 debt crisis. The number of
episodes declined in the late 1980s but rose again in
the early 1990s because of the GDP declines associated with the transition to a market economy in
countries of the former Soviet Union and in central
and eastern Europe. The number of ongoing episodes
has since declined sharply, despite some increase
associated with the global financial crisis and its
aftermath. Episodes associated with war are the most
frequent, followed by commodity shocks, crises, and
transition.
Table 1.5.2 provides some stylized facts on these
downturn episodes. It shows mean and median
declines in GDP per capita of more than one-third.
These episodes are typically protracted, lasting over five
years, and the growth rate in the five years after the
end of the episode generally fails to return GDP per
capita to its predecline level. Distinguishing among
episodes according to their main driving factor suggests that for the median country in episodes involving
wars, GDP and GDP per capita are lower, the median
duration of the episode is shorter (4.5 years), and the

increase in GDP per capita after the crisis is larger
(some 15 percent). Transition episodes feature the
largest median decline in GDP per capita (45 percent),
a relatively short duration (five years), and an increase
in GDP per capita after the crisis of about 14 percent.
The median crises and commodity shock episodes last
longer and have weaker postdecline rebounds in GDP
per capita.

The Aftermath of GDP Declines
The focus now turns to the speed at which GDP
per capita rebounds after these sharp declines. For
that purpose, the analysis considers both the growth
rate in the five years following a trough as well as the
length of time it takes for countries to return to their
predecline levels of GDP, and explores whether these
variables are correlated with basic characteristics of the
episodes: the initial level of development, the size of
the country, the extent of the GDP decline, and the
duration of the episode. Constructing these postdecline variables reveals a striking stylized fact: out of
the 92 countries experiencing a sharp decline in GDP

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

45

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Box 1.5 (continued)
Figure 1.5.1. Ongoing Episodes of Large
Declines in GDP per Capita (20 percent or
more)
Number of ongoing episodes
Share of countries affected (right scale)
45

0.30

40
0.25
35
30

0.20

25
0.15
20
15

0.10

10
0.05
5
0
1965 70

80

90

2000

10

0.00
17

Source: IMF staff calculations.

per capita in the sample, 45 had GDP per capita in
2017 still below its predecline level.6 These countries
account for over 5 percent of global GDP at purchasing power parity in 2017, and about 7½ percent
6Using the data from the World Economic Outlook projection
period changes results only slightly—three countries (Djibouti,
Kyrgyz Republic, Sierra Leone) are projected to reach their precollapse levels of GDP per capita during 2018–23 but Sudan is
projected to experience a more than 20 percent decline in GDP
per capita during the projection period.

of world population. They are predominantly small.
Exceptions include Iran, Ukraine, Venezuela, and some
economies in the Gulf Cooperation Council with
high GDP per capita that have experienced very rapid
population growth, including because of immigration
(Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates).
Excluding these four countries, those countries still
below their past peak in GDP per capita account for
about 3 percent of global GDP.
•• Table 1.5.3 presents the results of simple regression
analyses. In columns (1) and (2), the dependent
variable is the growth rate in the five years after a
trough; in columns (3) and (4), it is the number
of years following the trough it takes for GDP
per capita to return to its level immediately before
the collapse. The purpose of these regressions is
simply to identify correlations in the data—there
are clearly many omitted factors that can play a role
in explaining postcollapse economic performance,
ranging from economic policies to the external
environment (growth in trading partners, terms
of trade, and so on). With those caveats in mind,
a surprising result is that the postdecline growth
rate is uncorrelated with the extent of the previous change in GDP per capita, holding constant
the length of the episode. In other words, deeper
downturns are not followed by sharper recoveries.
However, the postdecline growth rate is strongly
negatively correlated with the length of that decline.
The regressions also suggest that, on average, recoveries tend to be weaker in smaller countries, consistent with the evidence on challenges to economic
performance in small states. The sample size for the
second set of regressions, in which the dependent
variable is the number of years it takes to return to
the predecline level of GDP per capita, is considerably smaller given that, as mentioned above, many
countries have not yet reached that predecline level.

Table 1.5.2. Declines in GDP per Capita: Stylized Facts

Mean
Median Standard Deviation Observations
GDP per Capita at Beginning of Episode (in constant 2010 US dollars)
11,933
2,466
23,639
133
Percent Change in GDP per Capita in the Five Years before the Peak
24
14
34
101
Percent Change in GDP per Capita Peak to Trough
–36
–32
14
133
Length of Episode of GDP Decline in Years
8
6
6
133
Percent Change in GDP per Capita in the Five Years after the Trough
14
11
18
121
Number of Years to Return to Predecline GDP per Capita
12
10
7
70
Source: IMF staff calculations based on data from the World Economic Outlook and World Bank World Development Indicators databases.

46

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Box 1.5 (continued)
Table 1.5.3. Postcrisis Outcomes and Crisis Depth
Log GDP per Capita at Peak

Cumulative Growth in the Five Years after the Trough
(1)
(2)
–0.70
0.01
(–0.72)
(0.01)

Log GDP at Peak

1.75***
(2.77)

Change in GDP per Capita
(peak to trough)

0.02
(0.33)

Length of GDP Decline (years)

–0.61***
(–2.84)

1.39**
(2.08)
–0.02
(–0.23)
–0.79***
(–3.37)

Number of Years to Return to Precrisis Peak
(3)
(4)
–1.41**
–1.13*
(–2.28)
(–1.86)
–0.25
(–0.62)

–0.15
(–0.40)

–0.11*
(–1.68)

–0.12**
(–2.13)

0.39**
(2.57)

0.47***
(3.57)

Adjusted R 2
0.09
0.15
0.11
0.16
Number of Observations
120
102
69
64
Source: IMF staff calculations based on data from the World Economic Outlook and World Bank World Development Indicators databases.
Note: Robust errors in parenthesis. *** (**) indicate statistical significance at the 99 (95) percent confidence level. Columns (2) and (4) exclude
episodes when the five years after the trough include the beginning of a new GDP decline episode.

For this more restricted sample, results suggest that,
as expected, it takes longer to recover from deeper
and longer-duration GDP declines. They also suggest that GDP per capita in poorer countries takes

longer to recover from sharp declines. These results
warrant a closer look at these episodes of large
declines in GDP per capita and their driving factors
in future research.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

47

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Box 1.6. Predicting Recessions and Slowdowns: A Daunting Task
Statistical models generally have limited success in
accurately predicting recessions—a decline in the level
of GDP.1 World Economic Outlook (WEO) forecasts
might be expected to do better, given that they also
incorporate judgment about how policies, external
factors, and recent economic news affect economies’
growth trajectories. However, an analysis of WEO and
private sector forecasts over 1991–2016 confirms the
difficulties of forecasting recessions.2
The number of economies experiencing negative
growth in any given year has been systematically
underpredicted in the October WEO forecasts of
the previous year, both for advanced economies and
emerging market and developing economies (Figure 1.6.1). While the average country in the sample
experienced 2.7 recessions during 1991–2016, out of
the 313 recessions in a sample of 117 economies, only
47 have been anticipated.3 Even for 2009, the year
after global output shrank when Lehman Brothers collapsed, only six advanced economies (and no emerging
market and developing economies) had been predicted
in the October 2008 WEO to enter into a recession;
subsequently, output was estimated to have contracted
in 56 (almost half ) of the economies in the sample.4
The accuracy in predicting a switch from positive (or
zero) to negative growth has been even lower: only
nine out of 212 “new” recessions were accurately forecast between 1991 and 2016.

Figure 1.6.1. World Economic Outlook Data:
Recessions, Actual and Forecast
(Number of countries)

Actual recessions

48

2. EMDEs

30 1. AEs

30

25

25

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0
1991 2000

10 16

Actual new recessions

1991

2000

10

16

0

Forecast new recessions
4. EMDEs

30 3. AEs

30
25

24

20

18

15
12

10

6
0
1991 2000

The author of this box is Francesco Grigoli. Jungjin Lee and
Jillian Zirnhelt provided research support.
1See, for example, Estrella and Mishkin (1998); Berge and
Jordà (2011); Levanon (2011); Liu and Moench (2014); Ng
(2014); Bluedorn, Decressin, and Terrones (2016); and Ergungor
(2016). Stock and Watson (2003) provide a review of the variables generally used to predict recessions.
2IMF forecasts represent the growth outcome seen as most
likely by IMF staff; that is, the mode, rather than the mean, of
the distribution of expected growth.
3The analysis is based on annual data, which are available
for most of the member countries. Observations corresponding
to years in which natural disasters caused damage of at least
1 percent of GDP, data for economies that had at least one
conflict during 1991–2017, and data for economies with average
populations smaller than 1 million people are excluded from the
WEO data set.
4Forecasts are formulated based on the information set
available in real time, hence ex post assessments of the forecasts’
accuracy should rely on first estimates rather than the latest
estimates of actual data. The use of revised data would unfairly
underestimate the forecasts’ accuracy, given that real GDP
growth is generally revised downward over time.

Forecast recessions

5
10 16

1991

2000

10

16

0

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging
market and developing economies. In the top two panels,
dots denote the number of recessions (output contractions)
forecast in the October WEO of the previous year; bars
denote the number of actual recessions (based on the
October WEO estimates of the subsequent year). In the
bottom two panels, dots denote the number of new
recessions forecast in the October WEO of the previous
year; bars denote the number of actual new recessions
(based on the October WEO estimates of the subsequent
year). New recessions are years in which growth turns from
nonnegative to negative.

The unsatisfactory record, however, is common
across forecasters. Data from Consensus Economics,
reflecting the average of private forecasters’ expectations for 44 economies (as of October of the previous
year), reveal a pattern that is strikingly comparable
to that of the WEO forecasts (Figure 1.6.2). For

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Box 1.6 (continued)
Figure 1.6.2. Consensus Economics Data:
Recessions, Actual and Forecast
(Number of countries)

Actual recessions
25 1. AEs

Forecast recessions
25

2. EMDEs

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0
1991 2000

10 16

Actual new recessions
18 3. AEs
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1991 2000

1991

2000

10

16

0

Forecast new recessions
4. EMDEs

18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4

10 16

1991

2000

10

16

2
0

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging
market and developing economies. In the top two panels,
dots denote the number of recessions (output contractions)
forecast in the October Consensus Economics of the
previous year; bars denote the actual number of recessions
(based on the October Consensus Economics estimates of
the subsequent year). In the bottom two panels, dots denote
the number of new recessions forecasted in the October
Consensus Economics of the previous year; bars denote the
number of actual new recessions (based on the October
Consensus Economics estimates of the subsequent year).
New recessions are years in which growth turns from
nonnegative to negative.

this restricted sample of 44 economies through
1991–2016, the WEO and Consensus Economics
forecasts projected a similar number of recessions, 16
and 13, respectively, out of 107 cases of negative GDP
growth. In 2009, only one advanced economy was
projected to fall into recession, but by the end of the

year output had contracted in 32 economies. Going
back to the full period under analysis, if one exclusively considers the instances in which the economies
were not already in a recession in the previous year,
Consensus Economics predicted only two out of 75
“new” recessions in its forecasts.
The poor track record of predicting recessions is
symptomatic of the overall difficulty of forecasting
slowdowns in growth. WEO forecasts do a somewhat better job of predicting slowdowns—defined as
declines in the rate of real GDP growth—compared
with recessions. Across all economies over 1991–2016,
growth slowdowns occurred about half of the time,
and about half of those were accurately forecast (in
the sense that the WEO forecasts predicted a decline
in growth for that year). The predictive performance
was somewhat better in 2009, when three-fourths of
the 96 slowdowns were correctly predicted. However,
restricting the 1991–2016 sample to “new” slowdowns
reveals that the direction of the change in growth is
correctly anticipated only about half of the time.
The slowdown metric does not distinguish between
mild slowdowns and severe ones. Focusing only on
severe slowdowns—defined as episodes in which real
GDP growth fell by more than the 75th percentile of
growth declines in the sample period—is an alternative
approach. To account for differences in growth volatility across advanced economies and emerging market
and developing economies, thresholds are based on
group-specific distributions, leading to the exclusion of
growth declines smaller than 0.5 percentage point and
0.6 percentage point in the two groups, respectively.5
Over 1991–2016, the average country faced 9.3 severe
slowdowns, and the count of severe slowdowns in the
sample reached 1,040 (Figure 1.6.3). In these episodes,
declines in growth were anticipated in 54 percent
of the cases, while severe slowdowns (slowdowns of
0.5–0.6 percentage point or more) were forecast only
in 31 percent.6

5The standard deviation of real GDP growth during severe
slowdowns ranges between 2.6 percentage points in Latin
America and the Caribbean and 4.4 percentage points in the
Commonwealth of Independent States. Despite this, the results
are qualitatively unchanged if the 75th percentiles are calculated
using country-specific distributions.
6A severe slowdown is defined as being “anticipated” if the
forecast decline in growth is at least 0.5 percentage point for
advanced economies and 0.6 percentage point for emerging
market and developing economies.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

49

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Box 1.6 (continued)
Figure 1.6.3. Severe Slowdowns, Actual and
Forecast
(Number of countries)

Figure 1.6.4. Forecast Errors during Severe
Slowdowns
(Percentage points)
2

Actual severe slowdowns
Forecast severe slowdowns

1
70 1. Advanced Economies

0

60
50

–1

40

–2

30
20

–3

10
0

–4
1991

95

2000

05

10

16

70 2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies

–6

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1991

95

2000

05

10

16

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: WEO = World Economic Outlook. Bars denote the
number of severe slowdowns (growth declines larger than
0.5 percentage point and 0.6 percentage point for advanced
economies and emerging market and developing economies,
respectively) in the October WEO of the previous year; dots
denote the number of forecasted severe slowdowns (based
on the October WEO estimates of the subsequent year).

Errors in forecasting growth tend to be larger
in years of severe slowdowns than in other years.
The median forecast error (defined as actual minus
predicted growth) during severe slowdowns is
−1.6 percentage points, revealing a positive bias in
the forecasts for those years (the median forecast
error is −0.2 percentage point for nonsevere, or mild,
slowdowns; −0.2 percentage point if all observations
are considered; and 0.5 percentage point for nonslowdown years). Across groups, the median forecast error
during severe slowdowns is −1.4 percentage points for

50

–5

AE EMDE Fuel Other LAC MENAP CIS
Exp. Exp.

SSA EMDE
Asia

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: AE = advanced economies; CIS = Commonwealth of
Independent States; EMDE = emerging market and
developing economies; Fuel exp. = fuel exporters;
LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENAP = Middle
East, North Africa, and Pakistan; Other exp. = other
exporters; SSA = sub-Saharan Africa; WEO = World
Economic Outlook. Bars denote the median of the real GDP
growth forecast errors (calculated as the estimate for growth
in year t as of the October WEO of year t +1 minus the
forecast for growth in year t as of the October WEO of year
t –1) during severe slowdowns. The vertical lines and the
dots denote the interquartile ranges and the averages,
respectively.

advanced economies and −1.7 percentage points for
emerging market and developing economies (Figure 1.6.4). Across regions in the latter group, it ranges
between −2.5 percentage points in the Commonwealth
of Independent States and −1.3 percentage points
in the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan.7
In years of synchronized slowdowns, accurately
predicting the growth rate of advanced economies
helps improve the accuracy of growth predictions
for other economies. Severe slowdowns appear more
7Means and medians of the forecast errors for all groups are
different from zero at the 10 percent significance level, except the
median for emerging and developing Asia.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Box 1.6 (continued)
Figure 1.6.5. Forecast Performance
(Percent)

Ratio of correctly forecast slowdowns
Ratio of correctly forecast recessions
Ratio of correctly forecast severe slowdowns
100

80

60

40

20

0
1991

95

2000

Source: IMF staff calculations.

05

10

16

synchronized in some years. For instance, in 2001,
2008, 2009, and 2012, more than 20 (40) advanced
economies (emerging market and developing economies) experienced a significant decline in growth. The
median decline in growth in these years was as large as
2.7 percentage points, almost 1 percentage point larger
than for the severe slowdowns that occurred in other
years, consistent with a larger drag from weaker external demand during synchronized slowdowns. Forecast
errors were larger, at −2.4 percentage points, in these
episodes, compared with −1.3 percentage points for
other severe slowdowns. A simple regression of the
probability of accurately predicting a severe slowdown
in emerging market and developing economies on the
share of the correctly predicted severe slowdowns in
advanced economies suggests that, if severe slowdowns
in advanced economies are missed, the chances of
successfully predicting severe slowdowns elsewhere are
significantly reduced.8
All in all, WEO forecasts perform somewhat better
in predicting growth slowdowns than in predicting
recessions, but the record leaves much room for
improvement in both cases, and forecast errors during
episodes of severe slowdowns are large (Figure 1.6.5).

8Probit

regressions reveal that a 1 percentage point increase
in the share of correctly predicted severe slowdowns in advanced
economies is associated with a 29 percent higher probability of
accurately predicting a severe slowdown in emerging market and
developing economies.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

51

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Special Feature: Commodity
MarketTitle:
Developments
and Forecasts
Special Feature
Special Feature
Head with a Focus on
Recent Trends in Energy Demand
Energy prices have increased since the release of the April
2018 World Economic Outlook (WEO), mostly driven
by higher oil prices. Notwithstanding record-high US production, tight supply conditions and sustained economic
activity in the first half of 2018 reduced Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
oil inventories rapidly, pushing up oil prices in May
and June to their highest levels since November 2014.
Since then, however, higher production in Saudi Arabia
and Russia has rebalanced the oil market. A decline in
metals demand from China and trade tensions have put
downward pressure on metals prices. Agricultural market
fundamentals, in contrast, remain solid and have partially
offset the introduction of tariffs on some key agricultural products. This special feature includes an in-depth
analysis of the long-term determinants of energy demand.

Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments
300 1. Commodity Price Indices
(2005 = 100)
260

All commodities
Food

220
180
140
100
60
20

2005 06

07

08

09

10

11

12

13

Oil Prices at the Highest Level since 2014
On June 22, 2018, OPEC agreed to increase its
members’ oil output by 0.7 million barrels a day (mbd)
to offset declining output in Angola and especially in
Venezuela, both OPEC members, and regain its origiThe authors of this special feature are Christian Bogmans, Lama
Kiyasseh, Akito Matsumoto (team co-leader), Andrea Pescatori (team
leader), and Julia Xueliang Wang, with research assistance from
Rachel Yuting Fan, Lama Kiyasseh and Julia Xueliang Wang.

52

14

15

16

17

Jul.
18

90 2. Brent Futures Curves1
(US dollars a barrel; expiration dates on x-axis)
80
70
60
50

April 2017 WEO
October 2017 WEO
April 2018 WEO
October 2018 WEO

40

The IMF’s Primary Commodities Price Index rose
3.3 percent between February 2018 and August 2018,
the reference periods for the April 2018 and current
WEOs, respectively (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 1). Energy
prices drove that increase, rising by 11.1 percent; food
prices declined by 6.4 percent, while metals prices
decreased by 11.7 percent because of trade tensions
and weaker-than-expected metal demand from China.
Oil prices increased to more than $76 a barrel in
June, attaining their highest level since November
2014. Since July, however, oil prices have stabilized as
Organization for the Petroleum Exporting Countries
(OPEC) and non-OPEC oil exporters (including Russia) agreed to boost production. Coal prices increased
strongly because of relatively tight supply conditions,
while natural gas prices increased in part following
higher oil and coal prices.

Energy
Metals

30
20
Dec. 2016 Dec. 17

Dec. 18

Dec. 19

200 3. Brent Price Prospects2
(US dollars a barrel)
160

Dec. 20

Dec. 21

Dec. 22 Dec. 23

Futures
68 percent conﬁdence interval
86 percent conﬁdence interval
95 percent conﬁdence interval

120
80
40
0

2013

14

15

180 4. Metal Price Indices
(Jan. 2, 2014 = 100)
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
Jan. 2014
Jan. 15

16

17

18

Aluminum
Iron ore

Jan. 16

Jan. 17

19

20

21

Copper
Nickel

Jan. 18 Jul. 18

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Thomson Reuters Datastream; IMF, Primary
Commodity Price System; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1
WEO futures prices are baseline assumptions for each WEO and are derived from
futures prices. October 2018 WEO prices are based on August 13, 2018, closing.
2
Derived from prices of futures options on August 13, 2018.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

SPECIAL FEATURE

COMMODITY MARKET DEVELOPMENTS AND FORECASTS WITH A FOCUS ON RECENT TRENDS IN ENERGY DEMAND

nal target level set in the November 2016 agreement.1
Notwithstanding record-high US production, tight
supply conditions and sustained economic activity in
the first half of 2018 reduced OECD oil inventories
from historically high levels to their five-year average,
pushing oil prices to more than $76 a barrel in June—
the highest level since November 2014. In July, however, oil prices retrenched from recent peaks and, as
of August, stood at about $71 a barrel as higher Saudi
and Russian production offset the effects of unplanned
outages in Canada and Libya and a tougher US stance
on the implementation of sanctions on Iran. Natural
gas and coal prices have increased, supported by strong
demand from China and India.
Oil futures contracts point to a decline of prices to
about $60 a barrel in 2023 (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 2).
Baseline assumptions for the IMF’s average petroleum
spot prices, based on futures prices, suggest average
annual prices of $69.3 a barrel in 2018—an increase of
31 percent from the 2017 average—and $68.8 a barrel
in 2019 (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 3). On one hand, global
economic growth is expected to be relatively strong,
albeit with regional differences, supporting underlying
oil demand—the International Energy Agency expects
oil demand to grow by 1.4 mbd and 1.5 mbd in 2018
and 2019, respectively. On the other hand, the US
Energy Information Administration expects US crude
production to reach 10.7 mbd in 2018 and 11.7 mbd
in 2019, putting downward pressure on oil prices in
the medium term. Canada’s oil production is expected
to grow steadily, too.
Although risks are balanced, uncertainty remains
substantial around the baseline assumptions for oil
prices because Saudi Arabia’s spare capacity is shrinking and US sanctions against Iran will both weigh on
Iran’s oil production prospects in the medium term
and reduce Iran’s crude exports in the short term,
requiring others with spare production capacity to step
in. Upside risks to prices in the short term include
a faster-than-expected deterioration of Venezuelan
production and a larger-than-anticipated reduction in
Iran’s crude exports. Downside risks include higher
OPEC output and stronger-than-expected Canadian and US production even though, in the short
term, the United States faces bottlenecks caused by
labor shortages and lack of pipeline infrastructure.
1The

0.7 mbd increase is the production increase necessary to bring OPEC output back to 100 percent compliance from current overcompliance (the calculations are based
on International Energy Agency data).

In addition, trade tensions and other risks to global
growth (highlighted in the section titled “Risks” in
Chapter 1) can potentially affect global activity and its
prospects, reducing, in turn, oil demand. Coal prices
are expected to decline from current levels due to a
rebound in supply and in line with declining oil and
natural gas prices.

Metal Prices Decreasing
After peaking in February, metal prices declined by
11.7 percent between February 2018 and August 2018
because of weaker metal demand from China following
stringent environmental regulations and tighter credit
conditions. Global trade tensions have also added
downward price pressures and substantially increased
volatility in metal markets.
The price of iron ore, the key input in steelmaking,
dropped by 12.4 percent between the reference periods
because of US tariffs on steel, substitution with scrap
by Chinese steelmakers, and China’s production curbs
across major steel mills. Copper prices declined after
the fear of a strike at the world’s largest copper mine
in Chile faded, while aluminum prices went through
a period of high volatility following US sanctions on
the giant Russian aluminum and alumina producer
(United Company Rusal), along with trade tensions.
Nickel, the main input for stainless steel and batteries
in electric vehicles, reached multiyear highs in early
June 2018 and then declined to its February price
on trade tensions. Zinc, mainly used to galvanize
steel, dropped 28.9 percent between February and
August 2018 following surging stockpiles and weak
demand from China.
The IMF annual metals price index is projected to
increase by 5.3 percent in 2018 (relative to its average
in 2017) but to decline by 3.7 percent in 2019 from
its 2018 average. Upside risks to the outlook for metal
prices include sanctions against metals producers and
easing environmental regulations in China. Downside risks are mounting because of trade tensions,
higher-than-expected metals production in China, and
a slowdown of the Chinese economy, which accounts
for more than half of the world’s metals consumption.

Food Prices Decreasing and Trade Risks Remain
Although agricultural market fundamentals
remain solid, the IMF’s agricultural price index
decreased between February 2018 and August 2018
International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

53

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Global Energy Demand

Figure 1.SF.2. Primary Energy Consumption and Supply
16,000 1. Total Primary Energy Supply 1971–2015 (Mtoe)
14,000

Coal
Oil
Natural gas
Nuclear
Renewables

12,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
0

1971 75

80

85

90

95

2000

05

10

15

50 2. Share of Primary Energy Consumption (Percent)
US
India

40

AEs excluding US
Fuel exporters

China
Other EMs and LIDCs

30
20
10
0
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Sources: International Energy Agency; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging markets; LIDCs = low-income
developing countries; Fuel exporters = Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, Ecuador, Gabon, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Libya,
Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela;
Mtoe = million tons of oil equivalent.

by 6.4 percent on trade tensions and concerns over
global growth.
Wheat prices increased by 22.6 percent between
February 2018 and August 2018 following adverse
weather conditions during spring and summer in
Russia and western Europe, respectively. Soybean
prices fell sharply, however, in June and July after
China announced a 25 percent retaliatory tariff on US
soybean imports and US production numbers for 2018
were revised upward. As a result, prices stood 14.7 percent lower in August 2018 than in February 2018.
Food prices are projected to increase in 2018 by
2.3 percent, and by a further 1.7 percent in 2019.
Weather disruptions are an upside risk to the forecast. As of August 9, 2018, the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration puts the chances of El
Niño during winter 2018–19 at 70 percent. A deepening of the trade conflict between the United States—
the world’s largest food exporter—and several of its key
trading partners constitutes a major downside risk.
54

The consumption of energy services and liquid
fuels is pervasive and essential in the economic system
and is the major driver of demand for primary energy
sources, such as fossil fuels, nuclear, and renewables.
Increased energy efficiency, however, has raised the
possibility of reaching a saturation point in the global
demand for energy (or some of its primary energy
sources), which could leave producer countries with
overcapacity and stranded assets. Moreover, the
use of energy, especially in the form of fossil fuels,
gives rise to a multitude of environmental externalities, the severity of which, in turn, depends on the
energy mix used and the technologies adopted (Stern
2006; IPCC 2014).
This section analyzes the main drivers of energy
demand and the evolution of the primary energy–
source mix by looking at long-term trends in energy
efficiency; exploring the role of power generation in
energy demand; and investigating the presence of an
S-shaped relationship between energy and income that
would, ultimately, induce saturation in energy demand
(Wolfram, Shelef, and Gertler 2012).

Basic Facts
The demand for energy services and liquid fuels
induces a direct and indirect (through power generation) demand for primary energy sources. Electricity has been a key force in the past decades: energy
demand from power generation increased by nearly
300 percent between 1971 and 2015—almost twice
the rate of total energy. This phenomenon, dubbed
electrification, has sustained the demand for coal and
has led to a major decline of oil as a share of total
energy and to increases in natural gas usage, and, more
recently, in renewables (Figure 1.SF.2, panel 1). Indeed,
power generation today accounts for more than
40 percent of the demand for primary energy, and for
about 55 percent if oil is excluded, which instead is
mostly used in the transport sector.
Although power generation has contributed
significantly to global energy demand growth, it is
worth looking at contributions by country. Emerging
markets, especially China and, more recently, India,
have driven most of the energy demand growth of
the past 15 years (Figure 1.SF.2, panel 2), while the
contribution of advanced economies has been minimal, leading to a decline in their world consumption
shares and raising the prospects of saturation in energy

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

SPECIAL FEATURE

COMMODITY MARKET DEVELOPMENTS AND FORECASTS WITH A FOCUS ON RECENT TRENDS IN ENERGY DEMAND

Table 1.SF.1. Total Demand Determinants for Baseline Specification
Population
GDP per Capita
(GDP per Capita)²
(GDP per Capita)³
Area
Oil Exporter
Gas Exporter
Coal Exporter
Coal Producer
Latitude

(1)
1.079***
–7.103*
0.843*
–0.0293

(2)
0.965***
–8.676**
1.044**
–0.0378**
0.0798
–0.0173
0.0483
0.378**
0.251*

(3)
0.959***
–5.068*
0.639*
–0.0231
0.0953*
0.00523
–0.0478
0.315**
0.132
0.0138***

(4)
1.161***
–6.889***
0.865***
–0.0330***

Static Saturation Point
401,087
179,389
323,516
82,921
Dynamic Saturation Point (1% eff. gain)
127,286
63,590
74,050
17,831
Dynamic Saturation Point (spec. eff. gain)
33,576
38,410
41,298
25,281
Inflection Point
14,447
10,039
10,184
6,204
Max Elasticity
0.9723
0.9416
0.8280
0.6660
Average Elasticity
0.9721
0.9233
0.8177
0.5888
0.95
0.96
0.97
1.00
R²
Model
WLS
WLS
WLS
WLS – FE
Sources: International Energy Agency; World Bank, World Development Indicators database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Energy exporters and producers are derived from the International Energy Agency. Average elasticity is calculated at $15,000 2011 international US
dollars. “eff. gain” is efficiency gain. “spec. eff. gain” is specific efficiency gain calculated using each specification’s average growth of time dummies. FE =
fixed effects; WLS = weighted least squares. Latitude is the absolute value of latitude in degrees for national capitals.
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.

demand for advanced economies (Wolfram, Shelef, and
Gertler 2012). This dissimilarity suggests a relationship between stages of development and the elasticity
of energy demand to income. Farrell (1954) and,
more recently, Gertler and others (2016) postulate an
S-shaped relationship between electricity demand and
household purchases of durable goods (such as domestic appliances and automobiles). Dargay and Gately
(1999) and Dargay, Gately, and Sommer (2007) find
such an S-shaped relationship for car ownership. The
next section tests whether such a relationship holds
more generally for energy demand and income.

(log) income per capita, ​gdp​; and a vector of control
variables, ​X​:2
​​Eit​  ​​  = ​β​  0​​  + ​β​  1​​  po ​p​ it​​  + ​β​  2​​ ​gdp​ it​​  + ​β​  3​​ ​​(​gdp​ it​​)​​​  2​​
	​+ ​β​  4​​ ​​(​gdp​ it​​)​​​  3​ + ​β​  5​​  × ​X​ it​​  + ​λ​  t​​  + ​ε​  it​​​	

(1.1)

Energy and Income: An S-Shaped Relationship

in which ​​λ​  t​​​are year fixed effects, while ​​X​ it​​​ includes a
time-varying energy-export and coal producer dummy,
distance from the equator, and the log of land area; the
indices i and t refer to countries and years, respectively.3
Results for the baseline specification, column (2),
and robustness checks are reported in Table 1.SF.1 and
in Online Annex 1.SF.1.4 Not surprisingly, the analysis
finds that energy demand moves in lockstep with population. Point estimates suggest that having a sizable land

Using an unbalanced panel of 136 countries, this
analysis tests for the presence of an S-shaped relationship between energy demand and per capita income,
controlling for the size of the country (that is, population and land area) and fossil fuel abundance. Time
fixed effects are used to capture worldwide gains in
energy efficiency and fluctuations in global economic
activity and energy prices. The sample is annual and
spans 1971–2015, covering two major energy price
cycles. Specifically, the exercise estimates the following specification relating (log) total energy demand ​E​
to (log) population, ​pop​; a third-order polynomial in

2Energy demand (in million tons of oil equivalent) is the sum of
electricity and primary energy supply (that is, coal, oil, natural gas,
hydropower, nuclear energy, and renewables). Energy data are from
the International Energy Agency; data on population, GDP per capita (in 2011 US dollars), and country area size (in square kilometers)
are from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators database.
Latitude is from the GeoDist database by Centre d’Etudes Prospectives et d’Informations Internationales.
3An oil exporter is defined as having oil production exceeding
consumption. A similar definition is used for natural gas and coal
exporters. A coal producer is defined as having production able to
satisfy between 60 percent and 100 percent of the country’s coal consumption. Distance from equator is the absolute value of latitude.
4The annex is available online at www​.imf/​en/​Publications/​WEO.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

55

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 1.SF.3. Energy Efﬁciency
Trend
Energy efﬁciency index (1971 = 0)
0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.8
–1.0
–1.2
1971

75

80

85

90

95

2000

05

10

15

Sources: International Energy Agency; World Bank, World Development Indicators
database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The red line represents the time ﬁxed effects estimated in Table 1.SF.1
column (2) with 95 percent conﬁdence intervals (shaded area). The blue line is a
linear trend estimated for the period 1971–89 (1992–2015) with a slope of 0.23
(0.13).

area, coupled with being a coal exporter (producer),
increases energy demand by about 45 (33) percent.
Turning to income, the data strongly support the
presence of an S-shaped relationship between per capita
energy consumption and per capita income. The inflection point in the energy-income relationship (that is, the
maximum income elasticity) is about $10,000 (in 2011
US dollars), which is below the global per capita income
in 2015, which stood at $15,000 (2011 US dollars).
Indeed, this inflection point has already been reached
by many emerging markets. At that income level, the
energy income elasticity is close to one.
At higher income levels, the elasticity starts to
decline. Ultimately, as income keeps growing, the
economy would reach a saturation point for energy
demand; however, at an estimated $180,000 per capita
(in 2011 US dollars) the saturation point looks, at
current technology, to still be very far into the future.5
Energy-saving technologies, however, can lead to
faster actual saturation by shifting the energy-income
5An economy with a $50,000 per capita income today (for example, Germany) growing at 2 percent a year would take 65 years to
reach a per capita income of $180,000.

56

curve downward because the same economic activities (such as heating, cooling, and transport) require
less energy. In the regression, improvements in energy
efficiency globally are captured by the time dummies,
which show a remarkably steady decline (Figure 1.SF.3).
Indeed, except for during 1990–92 (mostly affected
by the inclusion in the sample of former Soviet
Union countries, whose energy efficiency was lower),
the improvement in energy efficiency has been very
steady, averaging about 1 percent a year over the entire
sample. If it is conservatively assumed that energy
efficiency globally keeps increasing at its historical rate
of 1 percent a year, the saturation point previously
estimated drops to about $64,000 per capita.6
The estimated S-shaped energy-income relationship (Figure 1.SF.4) not only predicts energy demand
growth to be highest in emerging markets but also
captures the behavior of energy demand at low-income
levels. Typically, in most low-income countries, energy
consumption initially declines in response to income
growth probably as the result of graduation from biomass (solid biofuels excluding charcoal)—an inefficient
source of energy. Biomass, in fact, is an inferior good,
implying that households reduce its use as income
grows. The share of biomass in total primary energy
supply of the country tends to decline as income grows
(Figure 1.SF.5).
In conclusion, the evidence suggests that the relationship between energy demand and income follows an
S-shaped curve, with an initial decline of energy demand
at low levels of income followed by stages of acceleration
and then saturation at middle- and high-income levels,
respectively. Thus, the main driver of future energy
demand hinges on the dynamics of middle-income
countries. In fact, even though some advanced economies may have already reached saturation in energy
demand, estimates suggest that global saturation is still
far into the future. However, total energy is not all that
matters. The same level of energy consumption can be
the result of varying mixes of primary energy sources,
which is the topic of the next section.

The Primary Energy Mix
The optimal energy mix in each country is the result
of relative resource abundance, technology, and social
6An economy with a $50,000 per capita income today (for example, Germany) growing at 2 percent a year would take 13 years to
reach a per capital income of $64,000.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

SPECIAL FEATURE

COMMODITY MARKET DEVELOPMENTS AND FORECASTS WITH A FOCUS ON RECENT TRENDS IN ENERGY DEMAND

Figure 1.SF.4. Energy Demand and GDP per Capita
Japan
Russia

100

United States
France

COD
Share of biomass in total primary energy supply
(percent)

Energy demand per capita (kilogram oil equivalent), log scale

China
India

Figure 1.SF.5. Biomass

10.0

1.0

0.1

80

60

40

500
2000
8000
32000
128000 512000
GDP per capita (constant 2011 international dollars), log scale

Sources: International Energy Agency; World Bank, World Development Indicators
database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Adjusted ﬁtted values show the S-shaped energy-income relation
(constructed using the cubic polynomial) while energy demand per capita is
adjusted for estimated time ﬁxed effects. Estimates are from the baseline
speciﬁcation.

preferences. The local relative abundance or availability of an energy source determines its local costs,
while the efficiency of use in production determines
its desirability (that is, its marginal benefit).7 These
two factors combined help determine the relative
price of an energy source. Technical substitutability
across resources then determines the impact of changes
in efficiency of use or relative prices on the energy
mix. For example, the relative importance of oil as a
primary energy source has substantially declined over
time as other energy sources became cheaper (such as
coal and nuclear in the early part of the sample) or
more desirable to use (such as natural gas and, more
recently, renewables). The link between high and
volatile crude oil prices and the decline in the oil share
is indeed noticeable (Figure 1.SF.6).8 Over the long
7It

is up to policy to align private and social marginal benefits.
most advanced economies, the two oil shocks of the 1970s
that generated high oil prices called into question the energy security
of oil and led to a switch in the power sector, with oil being replaced
by alternative sources of power generation, such as coal, natural gas,
and nuclear power.
8In

TZA
NGA
MOZ TGO HTI
ZMB
NPL
GAB
NER
CIV
KEN KHM
SDN
ZWE CMR
GTM
MMR
COG
BEN
HND AGO LKA
SEN
NIC PRY
GHA

20

0
500
0.0
125

ETH

2000
8000
32000
Income per capita 2014, PPP adjusted, log scale

128000

Sources: International Energy Agency, IEA Renewables Information Statistics;
World Bank, World Development Indicators database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels for countries with biomass shares greater than 40 percent are
displayed in the ﬁgure. Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) country codes. PPP = purchasing power parity.

term, however, efficiency is also determined by capital
investment, which allows the potential of an energy
source (for example, investment in solar power or
natural gas infrastructure) to be better exploited. This
generates a relationship between the energy mix and
the stage of development (see Online Annex 1.SF.1 for
further details).
At medium- and low-income levels, the
semi-elasticity of the oil share to income is positive
as the transport sector expands (for example, car and
truck ownership increases), but it turns negative at
higher income levels when the stock of motor vehicles
plateaus, fuel efficiency reduces gasoline consumption,
and cleaner natural gas is preferred in heating and
power generation. Regressions, indeed, suggest that
peak oil demand may have already been reached for
some advanced economies, given that their oil share
declines while energy demand is close to saturation (see
Online Annex 1.SF.1). In contrast, the share of natural
gas seems mostly independent of income.
The relationship between income and the share of
coal is weak because higher incomes are associated
with cleaner energy sources but also with higher
electrification rates (the main driver of coal consumption). At medium incomes, however, coal has proved
International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

57

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 1.SF.6. Primary Energy Source Shares

Figure 1.SF.7. Decomposition of Change in World Coal
Intensity

(Percent)

(Percent)
Oil

Coal

Natural gas

Nuclear

Renewables
Country intensity
World coal intensity (right scale)

50
45

Composition effects
Change in world coal intensity
5.0

6

40

4.5

4

35

4.0

30

2

25

3.5
3.0

0

20

2.5
–2

15
10

2.0
1.5

–4

5
0
1971

1.0
–6
75

80

85

90

95

2000

05

10

Sources: International Energy Agency; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Sample is International Energy Agency world aggregate; grey shaded
area = high and volatile oil prices; nonshaded area = low and stable oil prices.

to be a cheap and abundant energy source able to
satisfy a quickly growing demand for electricity, especially in some large, coal-abundant emerging markets,
such as China and India (being a coal producer or
exporter increases a country’s coal share by 10 percentage points or 18 percentage points, respectively).
Hence, notwithstanding a reduction of coal intensity
at the country level, the legacy of high coal usage in
large and fast-growing economies led to a surprise
increase in global coal intensity in the mid-2000s
(Figure 1.SF.7). As China and other major emerging
markets develop, however, demand for cleaner fuels
is expected to increase, leading to a decline in the
coal share.
Although it is too early to assess the evolution of
renewables, the analysis clearly points to an increase
in the use of renewables in high-income countries,
especially for power generation. Advanced economies,
in fact, are typically highly electrified while emerging
markets, as they become more urbanized and expand
the electricity grid, are expected to substantially
increase their electrification rate in the medium term.
The projected rise of the electric car and growth in the
services sector, moreover, are expected to increase the
electrification rate in advanced economies, too.
58

0.5

15
–8

1991

95

2000

05

10

15

0.0

Sources: International Energy Agency; World Bank, World Development Indicators
database; and IMF staff calculations.

The implication of higher electrification rates
is important for primary energy demand. In fact,
while oil saturation will probably be reached sooner
than total energy saturation (as oil’s share in the mix
declines), saturation for natural gas and renewables
will come later. Recent sharp declines in the price of
solar photovoltaic cells and government support for the
development of renewables are paving the way for the
rapid growth of renewables (see Box 1.SF.1). Although
coal may remain attractive for some countries, local
air pollution has compelled China and India, to some
extent, to shift toward renewables. Thus, cost changes
and environmental concerns will play a key role for the
increased penetration of renewables and the saturation
point for coal.

Conclusion
Most of the increase in energy consumption is
expected to come from emerging markets whose energy
demand is approximately at its peak income elasticity,
which is about one. In contrast, that elasticity is close
to zero for advanced economies, suggesting that their

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

SPECIAL FEATURE

COMMODITY MARKET DEVELOPMENTS AND FORECASTS WITH A FOCUS ON RECENT TRENDS IN ENERGY DEMAND

contribution to energy demand growth will be more
modest or possibly absent. Nonetheless, emerging
markets’ saturation point for energy demand is still far
in the future—even assuming steady gains in energy
efficiency. Saturation, however, is probably much closer
for some energy sources, such as coal and oil, raising the
risk of stranded assets for high-cost projects, while other
sources, such as natural gas and renewables, are expected
to become more important in the energy mix as electrification rates increase. Even though dynamics in energy

transitions and technological innovations are hard to
predict, substantial long-term investment is required to
change the energy infrastructure of an economic system
(for example, the life of power plants and airplanes is
about 40 years). Nonetheless, climate concerns, energy
policies, and market forces will be key in forging future
energy markets as energy regulation and prices interact
to stimulate or constrain technological innovation. It is
the role of policymakers to exploit these interactions to
develop ecologically sustainable economies.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

59

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Box 1.SF.1. The Demand and Supply of Renewable Energy
The rapid growth of renewable energy since
the beginning of the 21st century (see Online
Annex 1.SF.1) can be attributed to several demandand supply-side factors. First, governments have
implemented a variety of energy policies over the years
that have helped countries lower their greenhouse gas
emissions. Second, aided by regulatory pressure, technological innovation has reduced the cost of wind and
solar energy substantially in recent years (Goldman
Sachs 2015; IRENA 2017).1
Using a model that relates renewable energy capacity to GDP per capita, population, a set of control
variables, and a trend, this box analyzes the outlook
for renewable energy capacity (see Online Annex 1.
SF.1). Results depend on whether the relationship is
estimated over the full sample (1990–2015) or only
over the most recent sample (2000–15), as the trend
coefficient increases from 1.7 percent a year to 3.9 percent in the most recent sample. The rising trend
reflects performance improvements and price reductions in several major renewable energy technologies,
most notably solar panels and wind turbines.
An out-of-sample prediction, focusing on 45 countries for which long-term forecasts for GDP per capita
and population size are available (OECD 2014), shows
that, under the conservative forecast, the world will
have accumulated more than 4,600 gigawatt of renewable energy-generating assets by 2040. This number
increases to more than 8,400 gigawatt in the baseline
scenario—a fourfold increase from 2015.
The increase in renewable energy capacity under the
conservative and baseline scenarios will, respectively,
deliver 732 million tons and 1,733 million tons of
oil equivalent of energy to the electricity grid, equal
to 50 percent and 117 percent, respectively, of all
electricity generated by fossil fuels in 2015. Indeed,
if the new renewable energy capacity were to disThe authors of this box are Christian Bogmans and
Lama Kiyasseh.
1Other factors of importance are the rate of interest;
cross-country differences in endowments of human capital and
raw potential for wind, solar, and hydro energy (Collier and Venables 2012); and government support for renewable industries
(see Zhang and others 2013).

60

Figure 1.SF.1.1. Renewables Capacity
(Gigawatts)

Existing capacity
Trend effect
GDP per capita effect
Population effect
Renewables capacity (conservative)
Renewables capacity (baseline)
9,000
8,000
7,000
6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
1990 95 2000 05

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development; US Energy Information Administration; World
Bank, World Development Indicators database; and IMF staff
calculations.

place fossil-fuel-based electricity generation, it would
constitute a sizable step in reducing global greenhouse
gas emissions.
Figure 1.SF.1.1. decomposes future renewable
energy growth under the baseline scenario into
income, population, and the trend effect. This shows
that renewable energy investment is driven mostly
by supply (technology) rather than demand (income
and population), which is in line with the popular
rationale of an energy transition led by innovations in
wind, solar, and other technologies. The same dependence on a persistence in the trend factor, however,
makes the outlook for renewable energy uncertain.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Projections
2017
2018
2019
3.1
2.3
1.9

Europe

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2.6
3.1
3.2

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2.4
2.4
2.4

Unemployment3
Projections
2017
2018
2019
...
...
...

Advanced Europe
Euro Area4,5
Germany
France
Italy
Spain

2.4
2.4
2.5
2.3
1.5
3.0

2.0
2.0
1.9
1.6
1.2
2.7

1.9
1.9
1.9
1.6
1.0
2.2

1.7
1.5
1.7
1.2
1.3
2.0

1.8
1.7
1.8
1.9
1.3
1.8

1.8
1.7
1.8
1.8
1.4
1.8

3.0
3.5
7.9
–0.6
2.8
1.9

2.9
3.0
8.1
–0.9
2.0
1.2

2.8
2.9
7.9
–0.7
1.6
1.2

7.9
9.1
3.8
9.4
11.3
17.2

7.2
8.3
3.5
8.8
10.8
15.6

7.0
8.0
3.4
8.5
10.5
14.7

Netherlands
Belgium
Austria
Greece
Portugal

2.9
1.7
3.0
1.4
2.7

2.8
1.5
2.8
2.0
2.3

2.6
1.5
2.2
2.4
1.8

1.3
2.2
2.2
1.1
1.6

1.4
2.2
2.0
0.7
1.7

1.6
1.8
2.1
1.2
1.6

10.5
–0.2
1.9
–0.8
0.5

9.9
0.1
2.2
–0.8
0.0

9.7
–0.1
1.8
–0.4
–0.3

4.9
7.1
5.5
21.5
8.9

3.9
6.4
5.2
19.9
7.0

3.8
6.6
5.1
18.1
6.7

Ireland
Finland
Slovak Republic
Lithuania
Slovenia

7.2
2.8
3.4
3.9
5.0

4.7
2.6
3.9
3.5
4.5

4.0
1.8
4.1
2.9
3.4

0.3
0.8
1.3
3.7
1.4

0.7
1.2
2.6
2.5
2.1

1.2
1.7
2.2
2.2
2.0

8.5
0.7
–2.1
0.8
7.1

7.4
0.9
–1.8
0.3
6.3

6.7
0.9
–0.9
0.0
5.5

6.7
8.5
8.1
7.1
6.6

5.3
7.7
7.5
6.5
5.8

5.1
7.4
6.9
6.3
5.4

Luxembourg
Latvia
Estonia
Cyprus
Malta

2.3
4.5
4.9
3.9
6.7

4.0
3.7
3.7
4.0
5.7

3.5
3.3
3.2
4.2
4.6

2.1
2.9
3.7
0.7
1.3

1.5
2.7
3.0
0.8
1.8

1.8
2.4
2.5
1.8
2.1

5.0
–0.8
3.1
–6.7
13.6

4.9
–2.0
2.2
–3.1
11.6

4.8
–2.6
1.1
–5.2
11.1

5.8
8.7
5.8
11.1
4.6

5.4
7.9
6.7
9.5
4.1

5.2
7.8
6.9
8.0
4.1

United Kingdom
Switzerland
Sweden
Norway
Czech Republic

1.7
1.7
2.1
1.9
4.3

1.4
3.0
2.4
2.1
3.1

1.5
1.8
2.2
2.1
3.0

2.7
0.5
1.9
1.9
2.4

2.5
1.1
1.9
1.9
2.3

2.2
1.4
1.7
2.0
2.3

–3.8
9.8
3.3
5.5
1.1

–3.5
10.2
2.6
7.8
–0.4

–3.2
9.8
2.8
7.8
–0.9

4.4
3.2
6.7
4.2
2.9

4.1
2.8
6.2
3.8
2.5

4.2
2.8
6.2
3.7
3.0

Denmark
Iceland
San Marino

2.3
4.0
1.9

2.0
3.7
1.4

1.9
2.9
1.0

1.1
1.8
1.0

1.4
2.5
1.5

1.7
2.6
1.6

7.6
3.5
...

7.7
2.4
...

7.5
2.0
...

5.7
2.8
8.1

5.4
3.2
8.2

5.3
3.3
8.3

Emerging and Developing Europe6
Turkey
Poland
Romania

6.0
7.4
4.6
6.9

3.8
3.5
4.4
4.0

2.0
0.4
3.5
3.4

6.2
11.1
2.0
1.3

8.3
15.0
2.0
4.7

9.0
16.7
2.8
2.7

–2.6
–5.6
0.3
–3.4

–2.8
–5.7
–0.8
–3.5

–1.4
–1.4
–1.3
–3.4

...
10.9
4.9
4.9

...
11.0
4.1
4.7

...
12.3
4.0
4.8

Hungary
4.0
4.0
3.3
2.4
2.8
3.3
3.2
2.3
2.1
4.2
3.9
Bulgaria5
3.6
3.6
3.1
1.2
2.6
2.3
4.5
2.4
1.6
6.2
5.6
Serbia
1.9
4.0
3.5
3.1
2.1
2.3
–5.7
–5.7
–5.6
14.1
13.8
Croatia
2.8
2.8
2.6
1.1
1.6
1.5
3.9
2.7
2.3
12.4
12.0
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Current account position corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions.
5Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices except for Slovenia.
6Includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, FYR Macedonia, and Montenegro.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

61

3.5
5.5
13.5
11.2

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
2017
5.7
2.4
1.7
3.1
2.2
2.9
3.6

Asia
Advanced Asia
Japan
Korea
Australia
Taiwan Province of China
Singapore

Real GDP
Projections
2018
2019
5.6
5.4
2.1
1.8
1.1
0.9
2.8
2.6
3.2
2.8
2.7
2.4
2.9
2.5

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2.1
2.7
2.9
1.0
1.4
1.6
0.5
1.2
1.3
1.9
1.5
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.3
1.1
1.5
1.3
0.6
1.0
1.4

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2.1
1.5
1.4
4.4
4.1
4.1
4.0
3.6
3.8
5.1
5.0
4.7
–2.6
–2.8
–3.1
14.5
13.8
13.6
18.8
18.5
18.3

Unemployment3
Projections
2017
2018
2019
...
...
...
3.4
3.4
3.3
2.9
2.9
2.9
3.7
3.7
3.7
5.6
5.3
5.0
3.8
3.8
3.7
2.2
2.0
1.9

Hong Kong SAR
New Zealand
Macao SAR

3.8
3.0
9.1

3.8
3.1
6.3

2.9
3.0
6.3

1.5
1.9
1.2

2.3
1.4
2.2

2.1
1.7
2.4

4.3
–2.7
33.3

3.4
–3.6
35.9

3.1
–3.8
38.1

3.1
4.7
2.0

2.6
4.5
2.0

2.6
4.4
2.0

Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India4

6.5
6.9
6.7

6.5
6.6
7.3

6.3
6.2
7.4

2.4
1.6
3.6

3.0
2.2
4.7

3.2
2.4
4.9

0.9
1.4
–1.9

0.1
0.7
–3.0

0.2
0.7
–2.5

...
3.9
...

...
4.0
...

...
4.0
...

5.3
5.1
3.9
5.9
6.7
6.8

5.3
5.1
4.6
4.7
6.5
6.6

5.2
5.1
3.9
4.6
6.6
6.5

3.1
3.8
0.7
3.8
2.9
3.5

2.9
3.4
0.9
1.0
4.9
3.8

3.2
3.8
0.9
2.3
4.0
4.0

2.0
–1.7
11.2
3.0
–0.8
2.5

1.3
–2.4
9.1
2.9
–1.5
2.2

1.0
–2.4
8.1
2.3
–1.5
2.0

...
5.4
0.7
3.4
5.7
2.2

...
5.2
0.7
3.2
5.5
2.2

...
5.0
0.7
3.0
5.5
2.2

6.2

6.1

6.3

4.9

5.3

5.5

–2.0

–3.4

–2.8

...

...

...

ASEAN-5
Indonesia
Thailand
Malaysia
Philippines
Vietnam
Other Emerging and Developing
Asia5

Memorandum
Emerging Asia6
6.5
6.5
6.3
2.3
2.9
3.1
1.0
0.3
0.3
...
...
...
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4See country-specific note for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
5Other Emerging and Developing Asia comprises Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Fiji, Kiribati, Lao P.D.R., Maldives, Marshall Islands, Micronesia,
Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu.
6Emerging Asia comprises the ASEAN-5 (Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam) economies, China, and India.

62

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Projections
2018
2019
2.7
2.5
2.9
2.5
2.1
2.0
2.2
2.5
–2.3
–1.1

2017
2.5
2.1
1.6
6.0
1.8

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2018
2019
2.7
2.3
2.4
2.1
2.6
2.2
4.8
3.6
2.7
1.2

North America
United States
Canada
Mexico
Puerto Rico4

2017
2.2
2.2
3.0
2.0
–2.4

South America5
Brazil
Argentina
Colombia
Venezuela

0.7
1.0
2.9
1.8
–14.0

0.6
1.4
–2.6
2.8
–18.0

1.9
2.4
–1.6
3.6
–5.0

Chile
Peru
Ecuador
Bolivia
Uruguay
Paraguay

1.5
2.5
2.4
4.2
2.7
4.8

4.0
4.1
1.1
4.3
2.0
4.4

3.4
4.1
0.7
4.2
3.2
4.2

2.2
2.8
0.4
2.8
6.2
3.6

2.4
1.4
–0.2
3.2
7.6
4.2

Central America6

3.7

2.8

3.8

2.6

3.0

6.4
6.9
7.1
3.4
3.7
4.2
25.7
31.8
31.7
4.3
3.2
3.4
1,087.5 1,370,000.0 10,000,000.0

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2017
2018
2019
–2.3
–2.5
–2.9
–2.3
–2.5
–3.0
–2.9
–3.0
–2.5
–1.7
–1.3
–1.3
...
...
...

Unemployment3
Projections
2017
2018
2019
...
...
...
4.4
3.8
3.5
6.3
6.1
6.2
3.4
3.5
3.5
10.8
11.0
11.0

–1.4
–0.5
–4.9
–3.3
2.0

–1.6
–1.3
–3.7
–2.4
6.1

–1.8
–1.6
–3.2
–2.4
4.0

...
12.8
8.4
9.3
27.1

...
11.8
8.9
9.2
34.3

...
10.7
9.4
9.1
38.0

3.0
2.0
0.5
4.2
6.7
4.0

–1.5
–1.1
–0.3
–6.3
1.5
–0.8

–2.5
–1.8
–0.5
–5.2
0.9
–1.3

–2.7
–2.2
0.7
–5.1
0.2
–0.9

6.7
6.9
4.6
4.0
7.6
5.7

6.9
6.9
4.8
4.0
7.9
5.7

6.5
6.8
5.2
4.0
7.6
5.7

3.4

–2.0

–3.2

–3.2

...

...

...

2.6
4.4
3.7
3.7
4.3
4.3
–0.9
–1.6
–1.7
...
...
...
Caribbean7
Memorandum
Latin America and the Caribbean8
1.3
1.2
2.2
6.0
6.1
5.9
–1.5
–1.6
–1.8
...
...
...
1.8
2.0
3.8
1.1
1.7
1.8
–8.0
–11.6
–10.2
...
...
...
East Caribbean Currency Union9
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Aggregates exclude Venezuela, but include Argentina starting from 2017 onward. Year-end to year-end
changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Puerto Rico is a territory of the United States but its statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
5Includes Guyana and Suriname. See country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6Central America comprises Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama.
7The Caribbean comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, The Bahamas, Barbados, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Grenada, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St.
Vincent and the Grenadines, and Trinidad and Tobago.
8Latin America and the Caribbean comprises Mexico and economies from the Caribbean, Central America, and South America. See country-specific notes for Argentina and
Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
9Eastern Caribbean Currency Union comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines as well as
Anguilla and Montserrat, which are not IMF members.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

63

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Annex Table 1.1.4. Commonwealth of Independent States Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account
Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)

Commonwealth of Independent States4

Real GDP
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2.1
2.3
2.4

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2017
2018
2019
5.5
4.5
5.7

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2017
2018
2019
1.1
4.1
3.3

Unemployment3
Projections
2017
2018
2019
...
...
...

Net Energy Exporters
Russia
Kazakhstan
Uzbekistan
Azerbaijan
Turkmenistan

2.0
1.5
4.0
5.3
0.1
6.5

2.1
1.7
3.7
5.0
1.3
6.2

2.2
1.8
3.1
5.0
3.6
5.6

4.8
3.7
7.4
12.5
13.0
8.0

4.0
2.8
6.4
19.2
3.5
9.4

5.6
5.1
5.6
14.9
3.3
8.2

1.6
2.2
–3.4
3.5
4.1
–11.5

5.1
6.2
–0.2
–0.5
6.6
–8.2

4.3
5.2
0.2
–1.5
8.1
–6.4

...
5.2
5.0
...
5.0
...

...
5.5
5.0
...
5.0
...

...
5.3
5.0
...
5.0
...

Net Energy Importers
Ukraine
Belarus
Georgia
Armenia
Tajikistan

3.2
2.5
2.4
5.0
7.5
7.1

3.9
3.5
4.0
5.5
6.0
5.0

3.2
2.7
3.1
4.8
4.8
5.0

10.2
14.4
6.0
6.0
0.9
7.3

7.9
10.9
5.5
2.8
3.0
5.8

6.2
7.3
5.5
2.7
4.4
5.5

–2.6
–1.9
–1.7
–8.9
–2.8
–0.5

–4.1
–3.1
–2.5
–10.5
–3.8
–4.7

–4.8
–3.9
–4.2
–10.2
–3.8
–4.3

...
9.2
0.8
...
18.9
...

...
9.4
0.8
...
18.9
...

...
9.2
0.8
...
18.6
...

Kyrgyz Republic
4.6
2.8
4.5
3.2
2.9
4.6
–4.0
–12.3
–11.8
7.1
7.0
7.0
Moldova
4.5
3.8
3.8
6.6
3.6
4.9
–6.3
–7.4
–6.3
4.1
4.1
4.0
Memorandum
4.1
4.0
4.0
9.0
8.4
7.2
–2.5
–1.3
–0.8
...
...
...
Caucasus and Central Asia5
5.5
4.9
4.9
9.5
12.8
10.7
–0.9
–4.6
–4.7
...
...
...
Low-Income CIS Countries6
Net Energy Exporters Excluding Russia
3.9
3.8
3.9
9.6
9.2
7.7
–2.2
–0.3
0.1
...
...
...
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Table A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), are included in this group for reasons of geography and
similarity in economic structure.
5Caucasus and Central Asia comprises Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan.
6Low-Income CIS countries comprise Armenia, Georgia, the Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.

64

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Annex Table 1.1.5. Middle East, North African Economies, Afghanistan, and Pakistan: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current
Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Projections
2017
2018
2019

Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2017
2018
2019

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2017
2018
2019

Unemployment3
Projections
2017
2018
2019

2.2

2.4

2.7

6.4

10.8

10.2

–0.7

1.8

1.9

...

...

...

Oil Exporters4
Saudi Arabia
Iran
United Arab Emirates
Algeria
Iraq

1.2
–0.9
3.7
0.8
1.4
–2.1

1.4
2.2
–1.5
2.9
2.5
1.5

2.0
2.4
–3.6
3.7
2.7
6.5

3.6
–0.9
9.6
2.0
5.6
0.1

9.8
2.6
29.6
3.5
6.5
2.0

9.9
2.0
34.1
1.9
6.7
2.0

1.6
2.2
2.2
6.9
–13.2
2.3

4.7
8.4
1.3
7.2
–9.0
6.9

4.8
8.8
0.3
7.5
–7.9
3.1

...
6.0
11.8
...
11.7
...

...
...
12.8
...
11.6
...

...
...
14.3
...
12.3
...

Qatar
Kuwait

1.6
–3.3

2.7
2.3

2.8
4.1

0.4
1.5

3.7
0.8

3.5
3.0

3.8
5.9

4.8
11.3

6.6
11.0

...
1.1

...
1.1

...
1.1

4.1
4.2
5.4
4.1
1.4
2.0
1.5
2.0

4.5
5.3
5.8
3.2
–2.3
2.4
1.0
2.3

4.0
5.5
4.0
3.2
–1.9
2.9
1.4
2.5

12.4
23.5
4.1
0.8
32.4
5.3
4.5
3.3

12.9
20.9
3.9
2.4
61.8
8.1
6.5
4.5

10.8
14.0
7.5
1.4
49.2
7.5
3.5
2.3

–6.6
–6.3
–4.1
–3.6
–10.5
–10.5
–22.8
–10.6

–6.5
–2.6
–5.9
–4.3
–14.2
–9.6
–25.6
–9.6

–6.1
–2.4
–5.3
–4.5
–13.1
–8.5
–25.5
–8.6

...
12.2
6.0
10.2
19.6
15.5
...
18.3

...
10.9
6.1
9.5
19.5
15.2
...
...

...
9.9
6.1
9.2
19.6
15.0
...
...

Oil Importers5
Egypt
Pakistan
Morocco
Sudan
Tunisia
Lebanon
Jordan

Memorandum
Middle East and North Africa
1.8
2.0
2.5
6.7
11.8
10.6
–0.3
2.6
2.6
...
...
...
3.3
3.6
3.5
0.2
0.9
1.3
2.9
2.3
2.3
4.2
3.9
3.9
Israel6
5.6
3.2
3.4
5.3
6.7
6.0
–8.0
–6.6
–5.8
...
...
...
Maghreb7
Mashreq8
3.9
4.8
5.0
20.8
18.8
12.6
–9.5
–7.2
–6.6
...
...
...
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Includes Bahrain, Libya, Oman, and Yemen.
5Includes Afghanistan, Djibouti, Mauritania, and Somalia. Excludes Syria because of the uncertain political situation.
6Israel, which is not a member of the economic region, is included for reasons of geography but is not included in the regional aggregates.
7The Maghreb comprises Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, and Tunisia.
8The Mashreq comprises Egypt, Jordan, and Lebanon. Syria is excluded because of the uncertain political situation.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

65

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Annex Table 1.1.6. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)

Sub-Saharan Africa
Oil Exporters4
Nigeria
Angola
Gabon
Chad
Republic of Congo
Middle-Income Countries5
South Africa
Ghana
Côte d’Ivoire
Cameroon
Zambia
Senegal
Low-Income Countries6
Ethiopia
Kenya
Tanzania
Uganda
Madagascar
Democratic Republic of the Congo

Real GDP
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2.7
3.1
3.8

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2017
2018
2019
11.0
8.6
8.5

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2017
2018
2019
–2.3
–2.8
–3.4

Unemployment3
Projections
2017
2018
2019
...
...
...

0.0
0.8
–2.5
0.5
–3.1
–3.1

1.4
1.9
–0.1
2.0
3.5
2.0

2.3
2.3
3.1
3.4
3.6
3.7

18.2
16.5
29.8
2.7
–0.9
0.5

13.4
12.4
20.5
2.8
2.1
1.2

13.5
13.5
15.8
2.5
2.6
2.0

1.1
2.8
–1.0
–4.9
–5.7
–12.9

0.9
2.0
–2.1
–1.6
–4.2
9.1

0.5
1.0
–1.9
–0.5
–5.5
12.4

...
16.5
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...

3.1
1.3
8.4
7.8
3.5
3.4
7.2

2.7
0.8
6.3
7.4
3.8
3.8
7.0

3.3
1.4
7.6
7.0
4.4
4.5
6.7

5.1
5.3
12.4
0.8
0.6
6.6
1.3

4.7
4.8
9.5
1.7
1.0
8.5
0.4

4.9
5.3
8.0
2.0
1.1
8.2
0.9

–2.6
–2.5
–4.5
–4.6
–2.7
–3.9
–7.3

–3.4
–3.2
–4.1
–4.6
–3.2
–4.0
–7.7

–3.6
–3.5
–4.0
–4.2
–3.0
–3.4
–7.1

...
27.5
...
...
...
...
...

...
27.9
...
...
...
...
...

...
28.3
...
...
...
...
...

6.1
10.9
4.9
6.0
4.8
4.2
3.4

5.7
7.5
6.0
5.8
5.9
5.0
3.8

6.2
8.5
6.1
6.6
6.1
5.4
4.1

8.9
9.9
8.0
5.3
5.6
8.3
41.5

7.3
12.7
5.0
3.8
3.8
7.8
23.0

6.6
9.5
5.6
4.7
4.2
7.2
13.5

–6.3
–8.1
–6.3
–2.8
–4.6
–0.3
–0.5

–6.7
–6.2
–5.6
–4.3
–6.9
–2.2
0.0

–7.8
–6.2
–5.3
–5.5
–8.9
–3.4
–1.8

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

Memorandum
Sub-Saharan Africa Excluding
South Sudan
2.8
3.1
3.8
10.4
8.3
8.2
–2.3
–2.8
–3.4
...
...
...
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Table A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Includes Equatorial Guinea and South Sudan.
5Includes Botswana, Cabo Verde, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, and Seychelles.
6Includes Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, the Central African Republic, Comoros, Eritrea, The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique, Niger,
Rwanda, São Tomé and Príncipe, Sierra Leone, Togo, and Zimbabwe.

66

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Annex Table 1.1.7. Summary of World Real per Capita Output
(Annual percent change; in international currency at purchasing power parity)
World
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area1
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies2
Emerging Market and Developing
Economies
Commonwealth of Independent
States
Russia
CIS Excluding Russia
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India3
ASEAN-54
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East, North Africa,
Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Saudi Arabia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Nigeria
South Africa

Average
2000–09
2.4

2010
4.0

2011
3.0

2012
2.0

2013
2.2

2014
2.3

2015
2.1

2016
2.0

2017
2.4

2018
2.5

Projections
2019
2023
2.5
2.4

1.1
0.9
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.1
1.3
0.4
1.2
1.0
2.6

2.5
1.8
1.8
4.2
1.5
1.2
–0.4
4.2
0.9
1.9
5.0

1.1
0.8
1.3
3.7
1.7
0.2
–1.4
–0.3
0.8
2.1
2.5

0.7
1.5
–1.1
0.5
–0.2
–3.2
–3.0
1.7
0.8
0.6
1.3

0.9
1.1
–0.5
0.3
0.1
–2.3
–1.3
2.2
1.4
1.3
1.6

1.6
1.7
1.2
1.8
0.5
–0.3
1.7
0.5
2.2
1.7
2.1

1.7
2.1
1.7
0.6
0.6
0.9
3.7
1.5
1.5
0.1
1.3

1.2
0.8
1.6
1.3
0.7
1.1
3.2
1.0
1.0
0.3
1.5

1.9
1.5
2.3
2.1
2.0
1.6
3.1
1.9
1.1
1.8
2.1

1.9
2.2
1.8
1.8
1.1
0.9
2.8
1.4
0.7
0.9
2.0

1.7
1.9
1.8
1.8
1.2
1.1
2.3
1.3
0.9
1.1
1.7

1.1
0.7
1.3
1.2
1.2
0.7
1.8
0.9
1.2
0.7
1.6

4.4

5.9

4.9

3.6

3.6

3.2

2.8

2.9

3.2

3.3

3.3

3.6

5.9
5.7
7.0
6.9
9.6
5.2
3.6
3.5
1.6
2.1
0.2

4.3
4.5
4.3
8.5
10.1
8.7
5.5
3.7
4.8
6.5
3.8

4.7
5.0
4.7
6.7
9.0
5.2
3.2
6.2
3.4
3.0
2.4

3.2
3.6
2.7
5.9
7.4
4.1
4.7
2.0
1.7
1.0
2.4

2.0
1.7
3.4
5.9
7.3
5.0
3.7
4.3
1.7
2.1
0.2

1.4
0.6
2.6
5.8
6.7
6.0
3.3
3.5
0.2
–0.4
1.7

–2.5
–2.6
–1.7
5.8
6.4
6.8
3.6
4.3
–0.9
–4.3
2.2

0.0
–0.3
1.0
5.4
6.1
5.7
3.7
2.8
–1.8
–4.2
1.8

1.7
1.5
2.7
5.5
6.3
5.3
4.1
5.5
0.2
0.2
1.0

1.8
1.7
2.7
5.5
6.1
5.9
4.0
3.2
0.3
0.7
1.2

2.1
1.8
3.1
5.3
5.7
6.0
3.9
1.5
1.4
1.7
1.6

1.9
1.4
3.5
5.2
5.5
6.3
4.1
2.3
2.0
1.6
2.1

1.9
0.5
2.7
5.4
2.3

2.3
1.6
4.3
8.3
1.6

3.9
6.8
2.4
2.1
1.8

0.6
2.5
1.5
1.5
0.7

0.0
–0.1
2.5
2.6
1.0

–0.1
1.1
2.5
3.5
0.3

0.3
3.3
0.6
–0.1
–0.3

2.9
–0.7
–1.3
–4.2
–1.0

–0.5
–3.3
0.0
–1.9
–0.3

0.4
0.2
0.5
–0.8
–0.8

0.7
0.4
1.1
–0.5
–0.2

1.1
0.3
1.5
–0.3
0.2

Memorandum
European Union
1.4
1.8
1.5
–0.6
0.1
1.6
2.0
1.7
2.4
1.9
1.9
1.5
Low-Income Developing Countries
3.7
5.0
3.5
1.6
3.7
3.8
2.3
1.2
2.4
2.4
3.0
3.2
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Data calculated as the sum of individual euro area countries.
2Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
3See country-specific note for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

67

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

References
Aghion, Philippe, Nick Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, and Peter Howitt. 2005. “Competition and Innovation:
An Inverted-U Relationship.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
120 (2): 701–28.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John van Reenen. 2017. “The Fall of the Labor
Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms.” NBER Working
Paper 23396, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Baker, Scott, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven Davis. 2016. “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 131 (4): 1593–636.
Barro, Robert J., and Tao Jin. 2011. “On the Size Distribution of Macroeconomic Disasters.” Econometrica 79
(5): 1567–89.
Barro, Robert J., and Jose F. Ursua. 2008. “Macroeconomic
Crises since 1870.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 39
(1): 255–350.
Baumeister, Christiane, and James D. Hamilton. 2015. “Sign
Restrictions, Structural Vector Autoregressions, and Useful
Prior Information.” Econometrica 83 (5): 1963–99.
Becker, Torbjörn, and Paolo Mauro. 2006. “Output Drops and
the Shocks That Matter.” IMF Working Paper 06/172, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Berge, Travis J., and Òscar Jordà. 2011. “Future Recession
Risks: An Update.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Economic Letter 35.
Bluedorn, John C., Jörg Decressin, and Marco E. Terrones.
2016. “Do Asset Price Drops Foreshadow Recessions?” International Journal of Forecasting 32 (2): 518–26.
Caldara, Dario, and Matteo Iacoviello. 2018. “Measuring
Geopolitical Risk.” Working Paper, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve Board, January.
Collier, Paul, and Anthony J. Venables. 2012. “Greening Africa?
Technologies, Endowments and the Latecomer Effect.” Energy
Economics 34: S75–S84.
Dargay, Joyce, and Dermot Gately. 1999. “Income’s
Effect on Car and Vehicle Ownership, Worldwide:
1960–2015.” Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
Practice 33 (2): 101–38.
Dargay, Joyce, Dermot Gately, and Martin Sommer. 2007.
“Vehicle Ownership and Income Growth, Worldwide:
1960–2030.” Energy Journal 28 (4): 143–170.
De Loecker, Jan, and Jan Eeckhout. 2017. “The Rise of Market
Power and the Macroeconomic Implications.” NBER Working Paper 23687, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
———. 2018. “Global Market Power.” NBER Working
Paper 24768, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
De Loecker, Jan, and Frederic Warzynski. 2012. “Markups and
Firm-Level Export Status.” American Economic Review 102
(6): 2437–71.

68

Díez, Federico, Daniel Leigh, and Suchanan Tambunlertchai.
2018. “Global Market Power and Its Macroeconomic Implications.” IMF Working Paper 18/137, International Monetary
Fund, Washington, DC.
Energy Information Administration (EIA). 2018. “Petroleum,
Natural Gas, and Coal Still Dominate US Energy Consumption.” EIA, Washington, DC. Accessed August 23.
Ergungor, O. Emre. 2016. “Recession Probabilities.” Economic
Commentary 2016–09.
Estrella, Arturo, and Frederic S. Mishkin. 1998. “Predicting US
Recessions: Financial Variables as Leading Indicators.” Review
of Economics and Statistics 80 (1): 45–61.
Farrell, M. J. 1954. “The Demand for Motor-Cars in the United
States.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 117 (2): 171–201.
Fell, Michael James. 2017. “Energy Services: A Conceptual Review.” Energy Research and Social Science 27
(May): 129–40.
Gertler, Paul J., Orie Shelef, Catherine D. Wolfram, and Alan
Fuchs. 2016. “The Demand for Energy-Using Assets among
the World’s Rising Middle Classes.” American Economic
Review 106 (6): 1366–401.
Gobat, Jeanne, and Kristina Kostial. 2016. “Syria’s Conflict
Economy.” IMF Working Paper 16/123, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Goldman Sachs. 2015. “The Low Carbon Economy.” Goldman
Sachs Equity Research. https://​www​.goldmansachs​.com/​
insights/​pages/​new​-energy​-landscape​-folder/​report​-the​-low​
-carbon​-economy/​report​.pdf. Accessed December 10, 2017.
Greening, Lorna A., David L. Greene, and Carmen Difiglio.
2000. “Energy Efficiency and Consumption—The Rebound
Effect—A Survey.” Energy Policy 28 (6–7): 389–401.
Gruss, Bertrand. 2014. “After the Boom—Commodity Prices
and Economic Growth in Latin America and the Caribbean.” IMF Working Paper 14/154, International Monetary
Fund, Washington, DC.
Gutiérrez, Germán, and Thomas Philippon. 2017. “Declining
Competition and Investment in the US.” NBER Working Paper 23583, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones. 1999. “Why Do Some
Countries Produce So Much More Output per Worker Than
Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (1): 83–116.
Hamilton, James D. 2009. “Understanding Crude Oil Prices.”
Energy Journal 30 (2): 179–206.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2014.
“Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report.” Contribution
of Working Groups I, II, and III to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Geneva: IPCC.
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). 2017.
Electricity Storage and Renewables: Costs and Markets to 2030.
Abu Dhabi: IRENA. http://​www​.irena​.org/​publications/​2017/​
Oct/​Electricity​-storage​-and​-renewables​-costs​-and​-markets.
Accessed December 10.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 1

Jevons, William Stanley. 1865. The Coal Question: An
Inquiry Concerning the Progress of the Nation, and the
Probable Exhaustion of the Coal-Mines. London and New
York: Macmillan.
Levanon, Gad. 2011. “Forecasting Recession and Slow-Down
Probabilities with Markov Switching Probabilities as
Right-Hand-Side Variables.” Business Economics 46 (2): 99–110.
Liu, Weiling, and Emanuel Moench. 2014. “What Predicts US
Recessions?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report
691, September.
Medlock, Kenneth B., and Ronald Soligo. 2001. “Economic
Development and End-Use Energy Demand.” Energy Journal
22 (2): 77–105.
Nakamura, Emi, Jón Steinsson, Robert J. Barro, and José Ursua.
2013. “Crises and Recoveries in an Empirical Model of Consumption Disasters.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 5 (3): 35–74.
Ng, Serena. 2014. “Boosting Recessions. Canadian Journal of
Economics/Revue canadienne d’économique 47 (1): 1–34.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). 2014. “Long-Term Baseline Projections.” 95
(Edition 2014). OECD Economic Outlook: Statistics and
Projections (database). https://​doi​.org/​10​.1787/​eo​-data​-en.
Silva, J. M. C. Santos, and Silvana Tenreyro. 2006. “The Log of
Gravity.” Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (4): 641–58.

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Sorrell, Steve. 2009. “Jevons’ Paradox Revisited: The Evidence
for Backfire from Improved Energy Efficiency.” Energy Policy
37 (4): 1456–69.
Stern, Nicholas. 2006. The Economics of Climate Change: The
Stern Review. London: HM Treasury.
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. 2003. “Forecasting
Output and Inflation: The Role of Asset Prices.” Journal of
Economic Literature 41 (3): 788–829.
United Nations (UN). 2017. “World Population Prospects: The
2017 Revision.” DVD edition. United Nations, Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, New York.
van Benthem, Arthur A. 2015. “Energy Leapfrogging.” Journal
of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists 2
(1): 93–132.
Wolfram, Catherine, Orie Shelef, and Paul J. Gertler. 2012.
“How Will Energy Demand Develop in the Developing
World?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26 (1): 119–38.
World Bank (WB). 2017. The Toll of War: The Economic and
Social Consequences of the Conflict in Syria. Washington,
DC: World Bank.
Zhang, Sufang, Philip Andrews-Speed, Xiaoli Zhao, and
Yongxiu He. 2013. “Interactions between Renewable Energy
Policy and Renewable Energy Industrial Policy: A Critical
Analysis of China’s Policy Approach to Renewable Energies.”
Energy Policy 62 (November): 342–53.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

69

This page intentionally left blank

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER

2

THE GLOBAL ECONOMIC RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER
THE 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN

This chapter takes stock of the global economic recovery a
decade after the 2008 financial crisis. Output losses after
the crisis appear to be persistent, irrespective of whether
a country suffered a banking crisis in 2007–08. Sluggish
investment was a key channel through which these losses
registered, accompanied by long-lasting capital and total
factor productivity shortfalls relative to precrisis trends.
Policy choices preceding the crisis and in its immediate aftermath influenced postcrisis variation in output.
Underscoring the importance of macroprudential policies
and effective supervision, countries with greater financial vulnerabilities in the precrisis years suffered larger
output losses after the crisis. Countries with stronger
precrisis fiscal positions and those with more flexible
exchange rate regimes experienced smaller losses. Unprecedented and exceptional policy actions taken after the
crisis helped mitigate countries’ postcrisis output losses.

Introduction
Over the weekend of September 13–14, 2008, two
large US financial institutions teetered close to failure
while a third urgently sought a buyer to avoid that same
fate. By Sunday night that weekend, Merrill Lynch was
acquired by Bank of America. Insurance giant AIG still
desperately pursued credit lines, just days away from a
ratings downgrade that looked likely to push it over the
edge. And in the early hours of Monday, September 15,
2008, the investment bank Lehman Brothers filed for
bankruptcy, brought down largely by its exposure to a
US housing market in deep decline.
The post-Lehman scramble for liquidity in global
markets heralded the most acute phase of the financial
turmoil that, by then, had been brewing in the United
States and Europe close to 18 months.1 The ensuThe authors of this chapter are Wenjie Chen, Mico Mrkaic,
and Malhar Nabar (lead), with contributions from Deniz Igan,
Christopher Johns, and Yuan Zeng, and supported by Luisa Calixto,
Meron Haile, and Benjamin Hilgenstock.
1Identifying a precise starting point for the timeline—the “patient
zero” of the epidemic—is difficult. This chapter takes the April
2007 collapse of subprime mortgage lender New Century Financial as the first major distress sign following the mid-2006 turn in
the US housing market. Key markers of financial stress over the
subsequent 18 months include the suspension of redemptions from

ing panic—marked by distressed asset sales, deposit
withdrawals from banks and money market funds,
and the freezing of credit—triggered a collapse in
cross-border trade and led to the worst global recession
in seven decades.
Ten years later, the sequence of aftershocks and
policy responses that followed the Lehman bankruptcy
has led to a world economy in which the median
general government debt-GDP ratio stands at 52 percent, up from 36 percent before the crisis; central bank
balance sheets, particularly in advanced economies,
are several multiples of the size they were before the
crisis; and emerging market and developing economies now account for 60 percent of global GDP in
purchasing-power-parity terms (compared with 44 percent in the decade before the crisis), reflecting, in part,
a weak recovery in advanced economies.
Against this backdrop, this chapter takes stock of the
global economic recovery 10 years after the financial
meltdown of 2008 and the policy lessons that can help
prepare for the next downturn. Specifically, the chapter
addresses the following questions:
• Compared with precrisis trends, how did output
evolve across countries in the aftermath of the crisis?
• How did the associated components—capital, labor
inputs, total factor productivity (TFP)—advance
after the crisis? What does this decomposition show
about why it took a long time for output in many
economies to return to its precrisis level?
• Even as the world economy experienced its worst
slump in seven decades, postcrisis macroeconomic
performance varied across countries. What accounts
for this variation? Which policies and structural attributes helped limit the damage and facilitate recovery?
The chapter uses a sample of 180 countries—
covering advanced, emerging market, and low-income
mortgage-related hedge funds associated with Bear Sterns (June
2007) and BNP Paribas (August 2007); the United Kingdom’s first
bank run since the 19th century, on Northern Rock (September
2007); the failure of mortgage lender Countrywide Financial (January 2008); JPMorgan’s acquisition of Bear Sterns with US Federal
Reserve support (March 2008); and the US government’s takeover of
mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac (September 2008).

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

71

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

developing economies—to quantify output losses,
explore the precrisis correlates of postcrisis variation
in output performance, and examine whether actions
taken in the immediate aftermath of the crisis are
associated with limiting output losses over the medium
term (2015–17). Previous World Economic Outlook
(WEO) analysis (October 2009) examines output performance after an earlier set of financial crises during
1970–2002. The current chapter builds on that by
zeroing in on the aftermath of the 2008 crisis.
An important consideration when comparing preand postcrisis output patterns is the extent to which
precrisis growth was fueled by excessive credit growth
and unsustainable investment that had to be worked off.
A related issue is whether structural change unrelated
to the crisis may have affected trend growth over time
in some countries (specifically, whether some countries experienced temporarily elevated potential growth
rates before the crisis that subsequently reverted to the
long-term average). As discussed in the next section, the
analysis attempts to adjust precrisis trends for the influence of factors, such as credit growth, that may affect the
path of output beyond the influence of typical demand
fluctuations. Even with this correction, for some countries, the output deviations from precrisis trends may still
capture the effect of slow-moving structural changes in
trend growth rates over time. Nonetheless, the chapter’s
cross-country analysis—comparing countries that experienced banking crises in 2007–08 with those that did
not, as well as across income levels—can help identify
precrisis drivers of postcrisis output deviations.
Among the main findings of the analysis are that
output losses appear to be persistent and not restricted
to countries that suffered a banking crisis in 2007–08.
Sluggish investment appears to be a key channel
through which these losses registered, with associated
long-lasting capital and TFP shortfalls relative to their
precrisis trends. Consistent with these TFP shortfalls,
research and development expenditure and technology adoption appear to have increased more slowly
in countries that suffered larger output losses. The
findings are similar to those of recent papers showing
that output tends to stay below previous trends after
crises and recessions (for example Cerra and Saxena
2008, 2017; Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers 2015;
and Aslam and others, forthcoming).
The analysis finds that policy choices leading up to
the crisis and in its immediate aftermath influenced
postcrisis variations in output performance. These can
be grouped into three categories.
72

• Financial: Underscoring the importance of macro­
prudential policies and effective supervision, the
analysis finds that countries in which financial
vulnerabilities had accumulated to a larger degree
in the precrisis years suffered greater output losses
after the crisis. In the years running up to the crisis,
countries with larger excess current account deficits
and those with more rapid credit growth found
that constraints bound relatively more strongly
when financial conditions tightened after the crisis.
Stricter banking regulation (proxied by an index of
restrictions on certain aspects of bank activity) in
the precrisis years is associated with a lower probability of a banking crisis in 2007–08.
• Policy constraints and frameworks: The evidence
suggests that countries with stronger precrisis fiscal
positions experienced smaller output losses in the
aftermath. The analysis also finds that flexible
exchange rate regimes helped lessen GDP damages.
• Postcrisis actions: Several countries took unprecedented and exceptional policy actions to support
their economies after the 2008 financial meltdown.
The chapter finds that these actions (specifically,
quasi-fiscal measures to support the financial sector,
including guarantees and capital injections) helped
temper postcrisis output losses.
Some of these factors appear to be particularly
relevant for the euro area. The 2008 financial crisis
exposed thin buffers in some member economies and
gaps in the architecture of the currency union. The
interaction of domestic and area-level factors exacerbated adjustment difficulties in the euro area following the 2008 shock and gave rise to an intensifying
sovereign debt crisis during 2010–12, which spurred
efforts to strengthen the architecture of the currency
union (IMF 2012, 2013a; Allard and others 2013;
Goyal and others 2013; Berger, Dell’Ariccia, and
Obstfeld 2018). In contrast to the 2009 shock, euro
area countries hit by the sovereign crisis were not in
a position to use expansionary fiscal policy to counter
the “sudden stop.” Rather, they needed to reduce
their fiscal deficits to regain creditors’ confidence
and contain sovereign borrowing costs. In the event,
the contractionary effect of this fiscal tightening was
larger than anticipated at the time (Blanchard and
Leigh 2013; IMF 2013b, 2015).
The next section quantifies the losses in output and
discusses the channels through which they occurred.
The subsequent section examines the policy and

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN

structural attributes that, in part, account for variation
in postcrisis output. The main takeaways are summarized in the conclusion.

Persistent Post–Global Financial Crisis
Deviations in Output
Following the global financial meltdown in late
2008, 91 economies, representing two-thirds of global
GDP in purchasing-power-parity terms, experienced
a decline in output in 2009. By way of comparison,
during the 1982 global recession, 48 economies,
accounting for 46 percent of world GDP, registered
output declines compared with the previous year.
To get a sense of the long-lasting changes in output
after the 2008 crisis, this chapter measures postcrisis
deviations of output from the level that would have
prevailed had output followed its pre‑2009 trend
growth rate (Ball 2014). Considering that generally
accommodative financial conditions likely contributed to unsustainable growth in many countries prior
to 2008, it is important to adjust for these influences when estimating an underlying trend path for
output as the benchmark for comparison (Online
Annex 2.2.B).2,3 Nevertheless, despite this adjustment,
in some cases, the measured output deviations may
include country-specific changes in trend growth rates
that are unrelated to the crisis. Consider the world’s two
largest economies, for example. In the United States, a
slowdown in total productivity growth that predates the
2008 crisis has contributed to lower potential growth
over time (Fernald 2015; Adler and others 2017).
China’s economy has experienced major structural shifts
that span the 2008 crisis and an associated transition
to slower, albeit still-robust, growth—an example
of a more general phenomenon of changes in trend
growth rates documented by Pritchett and Summers
(2013). Given these developments (and possibly similar
underlying shifts over this period in trend growth rates
in other countries), comparisons of current GDP with
precrisis outcomes must be careful to avoid attributing
all of the observed changes to the 2008 crisis.4
2All annexes are available online at www.imf.org/en/Publications/
WEO.
3Online Annex 2.2.B discusses the differences between the chapter’s approach and the standard filtering approach used for separating
output into trend and business cycle components.
4For the United States, for example, there is a range of estimates
regarding the postcrisis output loss due to the 2008 financial crisis
versus those related to changes in potential output growth already
underway prior to the crisis (see CBO 2014; Hall 2014; and
Barnichon, Matthes, and Ziegenbein 2018).

Figure 2.1. Correlation of GDP Deviations between Periods
(Percent)

Postcrisis performance is persistent, with a correlation coefﬁcient between GDP
deviations for 2011–13 and 2015–17 of about 0.90.
40

20

0
2015–17

CHAPTER 2

–20

–40

–60

–80
–30

–20

–10

0
2011–13

10

20

30

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: GDP deviations are average percent deviations from precrisis trend.

The post-2008 output deviations exhibit strong
persistence over time (Figure 2.1).5 A second noteworthy aspect is that economies with larger output
and employment losses in the initial aftermath of the
crisis registered greater increases in income inequality
compared with their precrisis average (Figure 2.2).6
These developments help shed light on the lingering
sense of subpar economic performance in many economies and concerns about a “new mediocre” (Lagarde
2014, 2016). They may also hold clues to the disenchantment with existing institutions and establishment
political parties, and the growing appeal of protectionism (Lipton 2018).

5The correlation coefficient between GDP deviations for 2011–13
and 2015–17 is about 0.90. As shown in Online Annex Figure 2.2.4,
the output deviations close to a decade after the 2008 crisis are more
skewed toward losses than those registered at a similar interval after
the 1982 global recession.
6Employment losses are measured as the gap between the number
of employed workers and the number consistent with employment
growing at the same rate during the postcrisis period as the economically active cohort between the ages of 15 and 65 (Schanzenbach and
others 2017; see Online Annex 2.2.B).

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

73

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 2.2. Postcrisis Change in Inequality

Figure 2.3. Postcrisis Output Deviations from Precrisis Trend,
2015–17

Average change in Gini coefﬁcient

Average change in Gini coefﬁcient

Economies with larger output and employment losses in the initial aftermath of the
crisis registered greater increases in income inequality compared with the
precrisis average.
8 1. Output Deviations

(Kernel density)

Output losses are persistent for a variety of economies, not just those that suffered
a systemic banking crisis in 2007–08.
Banking crisis

6

No banking crisis

0.05

4
2
0

0.04

–2
–4
0.03

–6
–8
–30

–20

–10
0
10
Percent deviations from precrisis trend

20

30
0.02

8 2. Employment Deviations
6

0.01

4
2
0.00
–40

0
–2
–4

–30

–20

–10

0

10

Sources: Laeven and Valencia (2013); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Distribution of average percent deviations from precrisis trend, 2015–17.
See Online Annex Table 2.2.1 for banking crises country list.

–6
–8
–20

–10
0
10
Percent deviations from precrisis trend

20

Sources: Standardized World Income Inequality Database (Solt 2016); and IMF
staff calculations.
Note: The Gini coefﬁcient is based on income before taxes and transfers and
ranges from 0 to 100. The change in Gini coefﬁcient is calculated as the difference
between the averages during 2005–08 and 2014–15. Movement from left to right
on the x-axis indicates less negative/more positive average deviations from
precrisis trend in 2011–13.

Output Remains below Precrisis Trend in More than
60 Percent of Economies
The deviations from pre-2009 trends are estimated
for two broad samples of economies: those that experienced banking crises in 2007–08 (as defined in Laeven
and Valencia 2013) and all other economies.7 According to the Laeven-Valencia definition, there were banking crises in 24 countries during 2007–08, 18 of which
were in advanced economies (see Online Annex 2.2.A
7The Laeven-Valencia (2013) definition of a banking crisis is based
on two criteria: significant financial distress (including bank runs
and liquidations) and significant government intervention in the
banking system (including recapitalization, liability guarantees, and
nationalization).

74

for the list). Figure 2.3 summarizes the distribution of
postcrisis output deviations from precrisis trends when
deviations are averaged over 2015–17.
Among the 24 economies in the banking crisis
group, about 85 percent still show negative deviations from the pre-2009 trend a decade after the
2008 meltdown. In light of earlier evidence (see,
for example, Abiad and others 2009; Chapter 4 of
the April 2009 WEO; and Blanchard, Cerutti, and
Summers 2015), it is not surprising that economies
in the banking crisis group suffered persistent losses
thereafter. As Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers
(2015) show, recessions associated with financial
crises are more likely to lead to persistent shortfalls
in output relative to precrisis trends. Less credit
intermediation—from a combination of supply and
demand factors—is a significant channel (Bernanke
2018). On the supply side, impaired financial systems
cannot intermediate credit to the same extent as
before the crash, and postcrisis regulatory tightening
can also affect loan origination. In parallel with the
supply disruptions, several factors may have held back

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

20

CHAPTER 2

THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN

credit demand. These include weak growth expectations, impaired corporate and household balance
sheets weighing on collateral quality, and an imperative to rebuild net worth.
However, Figure 2.3 shows the persistence of output
losses relative to precrisis trends for several economies, not just those that suffered a banking crisis in
2007–08 (consistent with Cerra and Saxena 2017 and
Aslam and others, forthcoming, who find persistent
losses associated with most recessions, not just those
associated with financial crises). In the group without
a banking crisis in 2007–08, output remains below
precrisis trends in about 60 percent of economies. A
possible channel—discussed later in the chapter—that
affected this group is weaker external demand from
trading partners that suffered banking crises, which
contributed to lower investment and associated capital
shortfalls (also see Candelon and others 2018).
Grouping the sample by advanced economies,
emerging markets, and low-income developing countries shows that output deviations tend to be large
across all groups (Figure 2.4). Output deviations are
relatively more balanced across gains and losses for
noncommodity-exporting (diversified) low-income
developing countries and emerging market economies
than for the other two groups. More generally, the
greater variability in output deviations across emerging
markets and low-income developing countries compared with advanced economies may reflect the variety
of forces acting on their growth processes, including
commodity price developments, export links to China,
and receipt of outward investment from China (see
also Aslam and others, forthcoming).

Proximate Causes: Sluggish Investment, Capital, and
Total Factor Productivity Shortfalls
The persistence of output deviations suggests
supply-side shifts in the factors of production. As
shown in Online Annex Figure 2.2.3, deviations in
output per worker trace similar patterns to deviations
in aggregate output, indicating that changes in labor
input cannot account for the bulk of the observed
output deviations.8 This similarity suggests shifts in
other factors of production associated, for instance,

8Nevertheless, as noted in Box 2.1, postcrisis economic performance appears to have had an impact on migration and fertility
decisions, with attendant implications for future labor input.

Figure 2.4. Postcrisis Output Deviations from Precrisis Trend
by Country Group, 2015–17
(Kernel density)

Postcrisis output deviations tend to be large across advanced economies,
emerging markets, and low-income developing countries, with relatively more
balanced gains and losses for noncommodity-exporting low-income developing
countries and emerging markets than for the other two groups.
AEs
EMs

LIDC commodity exporters
LIDC noncommodity exporters

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00
–40

–30

–20

–10

0

10

20

30

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Distribution of average percent deviations from precrisis trend, 2015–17.
AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging markets; LIDC = low-income
developing country. See Online Annex 2.1 for country groupings.

with weaker aggregate investment, as documented in
Chapter 4 of the April 2015 WEO.9
Investment shortfalls may have resulted from a
lack of access to credit after the crisis, or from weak
expectations of future growth and profitability (the
latter view reprises the 1930s notion of secular
stagnation—see Summers 2016 for a discussion; see
also Kozlowski, Veldkamp, and Venkateswaran 2017).
A similar calculation for output, as described earlier in
this chapter, suggests shortfalls in investment relative
to precrisis trends. Figure 2.5 shows the average across
all economies of deviations relative to precrisis trends.
By 2017, on average, investment was about 25 percent
below precrisis trend.

9An important exception is China, where the investment share
of GDP rose from below 40 percent in precrisis years to almost
50 percent after the crisis, driven by credit-fueled expansion of
infrastructure, residential and commercial real estate, and corporate
capital expenditure.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

75

40

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 2.5. Postcrisis Investment Deviations from Precrisis
Trend: Mean Trajectory

Figure 2.6. Postcrisis Capital Stock Deviations from Precrisis
Trend, 2015–17

Investment dropped below precrisis trend during the crisis and deviated further in
2012. By 2017, on average, investment was about 25 percent below precrisis
trend.

Close to 80 percent of economies that suffered a banking crisis in 2007–08
experienced shortfalls in capital relative to precrisis trend. Among economies that
did not suffer a banking crisis in 2007–08, about 65 percent appear to be
operating with capital stocks below precrisis trend.

(Percent)

Log investment

(Kernel density)

Trend log investment

Banking crisis

40

No banking crisis

0.04

20
0.03

0

–20

0.02

–40
0.01

–60

–80
2000

02

04

06

08

10

12

14

16 17

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: 2008 log investment normalized to zero.

Two important consequences of sluggish investment that may hold clues to why the recovery
appears to have been so slow, are shortfalls in the
capital stock and, to the extent technology is embedded in machinery, slower technology adoption. A
useful way to see this is to decompose the deviations
in output per worker from precrisis trends into deviations in capital stock per worker and residual TFP
deviations. A caveat here is that, even though TFP, in
principle, reflects both technology and the efficiency
of combining inputs, in practice it also reflects
measurement error in the factors of production
and changes in capacity utilization. Evidence from
standard growth accounting techniques (described
in Online Annex 2.2.B and summarized in Figure 2.6) suggests that there are large capital shortfalls
relative to precrisis trends. Close to 80 percent of
economies that suffered a banking crisis in 2007–08
experienced shortfalls in capital relative to precrisis
trends. Among economies without a banking crisis in
2007–08, capital stocks of about 65 percent appear
to be lower than they would be if capital accumulation had followed the extrapolated precrisis trend
76

0.00
–40

–30

–20

–10

0

10

20

30

Sources: Laeven and Valencia (2013); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Distribution of average percent deviations from precrisis trend, 2015–17.
See Online Annex Table 2.2.1 for banking crises country list.

path.10 At the sectoral level, these capital shortfalls
are widespread, extending beyond the construction
sector, which underwent a needed correction after the
precrisis boom (Online Annex Figure 2.2.5).
A second possible consequence of sluggish investment
is slow technology adoption—to the extent that new
technologies are embodied in equipment. The growth
accounting approach attributes a significant role to the
residual (TFP) component of deviations from precrisis trend in output per worker once the influence of
deviations in capital per worker is taken into account
(Figure 2.7). These estimated deviations in TFP from
precrisis trends are consistent with evidence of widespread postcrisis deceleration in TFP growth discussed in
Adler and others (2017). As reported in Table 2.1, the
median share of output per worker deviation accounted
for by TFP deviation is close to 80 percent for both
groups of economies. While the evidence points to the
10Online Annex 2.2.B shows that the distributions of capital stock
deviations are not distinguishable across the two groups in a statistical sense, while those of output and TFP are.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

40

CHAPTER 2

THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN

Table 2.1. Total Factor Productivity Deviations
Account for a Large Share of GDP per Worker
Deviations

Figure 2.7. Postcrisis Total Factor Productivity Deviations
from Precrisis Trend, 2015–17
(Kernel density)

(Percent)
Estimated deviations in TFP from precrisis trend are consistent with the evidence
of a widespread postcrisis deceleration in TFP growth. These TFP deviations
account for close to 80 percent of output per worker deviations for both groups of
economies, that is, those that suffered banking crises in 2007–08 and those that
did not.
Banking crisis

Median Share of GDP Deviation Accounted for by Deviation
in GDP per Worker, 2015–17
Countries without banking crisis in 2007–08
70.4
2007–08 banking crisis countries
80.5
Median Share of GDP per Worker Deviation Accounted for
by Total Factor Productivity, 2015–17
Countries without banking crisis in 2007–08
79.3
2007–08 banking crisis countries
78.2
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex Table 2.2.1 for banking crises country list.

No banking crisis

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00
–40

–30

–20

–10

0

10

20

30

40

Sources: Laeven and Valencia (2013); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Distribution of average percent deviations from precrisis trend, 2015–17.
TFP = total factor productivity. See Online Annex Table 2.2.1 for banking crises
country list.

importance of TFP deviations in accounting for output
per worker deviations, the cross-country data do not
permit a further separation of TFP deviations into those
due to sluggish investment from those related to worsening efficiency or other factors unrelated to investment.

Further confirmation of slower innovation and
technology adoption among countries hit harder by the
crisis is seen through the example of industrial robots—
an observable and much-discussed class of automation
technology expected to replace human labor in an
increasing range of tasks. (Box 2.2 examines the postcrisis employment impact of industrial robots.)11
An inspection of the industrial robot data (Figure 2.9)
indicates that the average change in density—measured
as robot shipments per thousand hours worked—during
the postcrisis period was higher in countries that had
smaller postcrisis losses in output.
As with the general measure of innovation (research
and development expenditure), the gap in changes in
robot density between high- and low-output-loss countries is higher among advanced economies than among
emerging markets. As part of the generalized slower
investment in the postcrisis period, robot adoption
may have been affected more negatively in countries
hit harder by the crisis.12 This “suppressed-investment”

Slower Technology Adoption
The estimates of TFP deviation suggest that the
pace of technology adoption (and associated pace of
upgrading of capital stock with embodied technology)
may have slowed following the crisis. However, as
noted above, TFP is an imperfect proxy for the pace of
technology adoption. A clearer picture emerges from
examining variables directly associated with innovation
and technology adoption. Cross-country evidence on
a key innovation input—research and development
spending—suggests that countries with above‑median
output losses registered slower increases in research and
development shares of GDP. This is especially evident
among advanced economies (Figure 2.8).

11As described in Online Annex 2.3.A, data from the International
Federation of Robotics, which compiles information on worldwide
shipment of robots, are used to examine the postcrisis diffusion of
automation technology. The data are reported at the level of industries for 75 countries extending back to 2004 (for some countries,
data are available going back to 1993).
12While there is possibly an element of reverse causality in these
correlations (lower robot investment contributed to higher output
loss), empirically, the magnitude of robot investment compared with
manufacturing output in the United States, for example, suggests
that the effect of robot investment on manufacturing—as well as
aggregate—output is small. Based on US Bureau of Economic
Analysis data, the International Federation of Robotics (the data
source for robots used in the analysis) reports that the value of
industrial robot shipments to the United States as a share of US
gross manufacturing output ranged between 0.016 percent in 2002
and 0.027 percent in 2016.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

77

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 2.8. Changes in Research and Development
Expenditure, by Output Losses and Country Groups

Figure 2.9. Average Change in Robot Density, by Output
Losses and Country Groups, 2010–14

Countries with above-median output losses registered slower increases in
research and development expenditure shares of GDP. This was especially evident
among advanced economies.

The gap in changes in robot density between high and low loss countries is higher
among advanced economies than among emerging markets.

(Percent of GDP)

0.04

0.3

0.03

0.2

0.02

0.1

0.01

0.0

0.00

–0.1

–0.01

–0.2

–0.3

(Robot shipment per 1,000 hours worked)

–0.02
High loss
Low loss
Advanced economies

High loss
Low loss
Emerging markets

Sources: World Bank, World Development Indicators database; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: The bars depict the difference in averages between 2014–16 and 2011–13.
The bar chart shows the interquartile range, and lines display lesser of the
maximum (minimum) and +/– 1.5 times the upper (lower) quartile range. High
(low) loss indicates above (below) median losses in output relative to precrisis
trend as calculated in Online Annex 2.2.B.

effect likely more than offset any tendency to automate
rather than rehire unemployed workers.13

Policy Frameworks, Measures, and Postcrisis
Output Performance
A large number of economies registered output losses
relative to precrisis trends, but the postcrisis experience
varied by individual country. In part, this variation may
reflect differences in the nature of the shock at the level
of individual countries. Some suffered severe banking
crises as part of the global financial panic, while others
were affected mostly through their trade and financial
links to the first set of countries. But initial conditions
13Analysis at the industry-country level (Online Annex 2.3.B)
corroborates this finding. Industries in advanced economies that
suffered relatively bigger investment and TFP losses during the crisis
experienced slower robot diffusion.

78

High loss+
Low loss+
Advanced economies

High loss
Low loss
Emerging markets

Sources: International Federation of Robotics; World Input-Output Database; and
IMF staff calculations.
Note: Robot density is deﬁned as robot shipment/1,000 hours worked. The bar
chart shows the interquartile range, and lines display lesser of the maximum
(minimum) and +/– 1.5 times the upper (lower) quartile range. High (low) loss
indicates above (below) median losses in output relative to precrisis trend as
calculated in Online Annex 2.2.B.
+
denotes differences in medians between high- and low-output loss samples
among advanced economies statistically signiﬁcant at 10 percent. See Online
Annex 2.3 and Online Annex Table 2.3.2 for further details on data and estimation.

in the buildup to the meltdown of 2008, policy choices
in the immediate aftermath of the crisis, and structural
aspects may have also helped shape postcrisis variation
in output performance—in the first instance, by influencing countries’ vulnerability to the disruptive forces
the financial meltdown of 2008 unleashed, and subsequently, by affecting the damage they experienced and
their ability to recover.
Identifying why economies’ responses differed
can provide important lessons for the most effective
policy responses. The exercise can also help shed light
on actions that may help limit damage and facilitate
recovery in future downturns.

Empirical Approach
The previous section noted the persistence of
output losses, with a strong correlation between GDP

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN

deviations for 2011–13 and 2015–17. Understanding
the sources of variation in output performance during
2011–13 can therefore provide insight into output
patterns observed during 2015–17.
As explained in Online Annex 2.2.C, the empirical
approach estimates cross-sectional regressions similar
to those of other studies that have examined various
aspects of cross-country variation in the impact of
the global financial crisis (Blanchard, Faruqee, and
Das 2010; Claessens and others 2010; Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti 2010, 2014; Giannone, Lenza, and
Reichlin 2011; Berkmen and others 2012; Tsangarides
2012; Cerra, Panizza, and Saxena 2013). The approach
builds on Chapter 4 of the October 2009 WEO,
which studies the determinants of medium-term
output losses following financial crises in advanced,
emerging market, and developing economies during
1970–2002 (see also Abiad and others 2009).

The Nature of the Shock Matters
Although the 2008 financial crisis originated in the
United States and Europe, it had a global macroeconomic impact. The origins of the crisis are by now
well documented.14 Four aspects are common to most
accounts. First, abundant global liquidity enabled a
lending boom in the United States, United Kingdom,
euro area, and central and eastern Europe before 2008.
As discussed in Chapter 2 of the October 2018 Global
Financial Stability Report (GFSR), the credit expansion
was intermediated through complex links between
traditional banks and nonbank financial institutions
beyond the regulatory perimeter. Second, as a wave
of US adjustable rate mortgages began to reset in
2006–07 and subprime borrowers found it difficult to
stay current on their loans or refinance them, the US
housing market began to turn in an unprecedented,
synchronized manner across many states. Third, unlike
the late-1990s US subprime mortgage collapse, which
affected mostly loan originators, the financial losses
were amplified in 2007–08 by the poorly monitored
practice of securitizing subprime loans into complex
financial products that became impossible to price in
a declining market. Fourth, tightening global financial conditions during 2007–08 hastened the end of
the lending boom in the euro area, United Kingdom,
14See,

for example, Obstfeld and Rogoff 2009; Sorkin 2009; Lewis
2010; Lowenstein 2010; Rajan 2010; Blinder 2013; Paulson 2013;
Geithner 2014; Bernanke 2015; Bayoumi 2017; and Toloui 2018.

and central and eastern Europe, triggering a wave
of defaults by overextended property developers and
households unable to roll over their loans, which
further strained the balance sheets of European banks
already caught in the web of losses on US subprime
mortgage exposures. In the euro area, a debilitating
nexus soon emerged between banks and sovereigns:
taxpayer bailouts and guarantees of distressed banks
severely undermined public debt sustainability in some
countries; in others, weak fiscal positions and widening
government spreads critically compromised banks with
large holdings of sovereign securities.
For economies that experienced banking crises
in 2007–08, the loss of intermediation services and
diminished credit volumes, not surprisingly, had a
far-reaching impact on activity. The associated corporate failures and employment losses undermined the
ability of borrowers to service their loans, spiraled back
to sap bank balance sheets, forced banks to retrench
credit further, and amplified the output decline.15
The analysis suggests that, on average, countries that
experienced banking crises suffered a 4 percentage
point higher output loss during 2011–13 relative to
the precrisis trend than those that did not experience
banking crises in 2007–08. (Online Annex Table 2.2.5;
Table 2.2 summarizes the direction of impacts for the
various drivers.)

Macroeconomic Imbalances and Financial Factors
Regardless of whether a country suffered a banking
crisis in 2007–08, tighter financial conditions after the
crisis brought out the central role of precrisis financial
vulnerabilities in influencing postcrisis output performance. This influence is reflected, at a general level, in
the variation of output performance as a function of
initial macroeconomic and financial imbalances. It is
also seen in the role played by specific factors, such as
the pace of precrisis credit growth.
A useful summary statistic of macroeconomic imbalances is the gap between the actual current account
balance and its level consistent with medium-term
fundamentals. This gap can be thought of as a
real-time estimate of imbalances resulting from private
15Gertler and Gilchrist (2018) examine the relative contributions of banking disruption and household balance sheets to the
contraction of US employment during the Great Recession. They
find that banking disruption is key to the aggregate decline in US
employment, while household balance sheet strength is relatively
more important for explaining regional variation.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

79

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Table 2.2. Impact of Precrisis Conditions on 2011–13 GDP Deviations from Precrisis Trend
(1)

(2)

(3)

All Countries
–**
–***
–***
–
+
+
–*
–
+
+***
+
–**
–***
–**
–**
–

(4)

(5)

AEs

(6)
EMs

Domestic Credit Growth
–***
–***
–**
–***
Demand Exposure to Advanced Economies
+
–
–
+
Demand Exposure to China
+
+**
+
+*
Financial Openness
–
–
–
–
CA Balance
+***
–
CA Gap
+
+***
Share of Manufacturing in GDP
+
+
Difficulty of Dismissal
–*
–**
Precrisis GG Debt Change
–***
–***
De Facto Peg Dummy
–***
–
Banking Crisis
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: + denotes positive impact, – denotes negative impact. Precrisis conditions are averaged over 2005–08. Results in columns (1) and (2) are reported in
Online Annex Table 2.2.5. Results in columns (3) through (6) are reported in Online Annex Table 2.2.7. AEs = advanced economies; CA = current account;
CA Gap = excess external balance, Lee and others (2008); EMs = emerging markets; GG = general government.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

and public saving-investment disparities (see Lee and
others 2008; and Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2010). The
results suggest that countries with current account
balances weaker than the level consistent with fundamentals entering the crisis suffered bigger output losses
relative to precrisis trends (Online Annex Table 2.2.5;
Table 2.2). This may, in part, reflect the more severe
adjustment forced on countries with higher precrisis
excess deficits.
In addition, countries more dependent on credit
(those with faster credit growth in the buildup to
the crisis) suffered larger losses in an environment of
tighter financial conditions.

Labor Market Structure
Some economies are more flexible than others when
it comes to relocating workers in the face of shocks. The
strength of employment protection legislation—the balance it provides between security for workers and flexibility for firms—is a key influence on firms’ decisions to
hire new workers. The evidence suggests that economies
in which it was more difficult for firms to terminate
labor contracts (proxied by an index of ease of dismissal
compiled by the Centre for Business Research [CBR] at
Cambridge University) suffered larger postcrisis losses
in output relative to precrisis trends (Table 2.2).16 This
16The Cambridge University CBR index (Adams, Bishop, and
Deakin 2016) is based on an average of nine detailed indicators of
dismissal procedures constructed using leximetric coding methodology on country-level labor legislation. The index is used here because
it has broader country coverage than the Organisation for Economic

80

may indicate reluctance on the part of firms during the
postcrisis recovery phase to expand operations and lock
themselves into costly contracts in economies where
subsequent exit would be more difficult.

Spillovers
The results in Table 2.2 are also consistent with
spillover effects through trade. Controlling for the
effect of banking crises, economies relatively more
exposed to demand from advanced economies suffered
larger output losses in the aftermath.
The size of gross external financial exposure acted as
another key channel through which financial distress
from the crippled core of advanced economies transmitted to the rest of the global economy. Countries
more integrated into global financial markets (represented by larger fractions of external assets and liabilities relative to GDP) experienced bigger deviations
from the precrisis trend.17 This may reflect, in part,
retrenchment in global banking after the crisis.
Co-operation and Development’s (OECD’s) strength of employment
protection indices. The index correlates well with the OECD measures for countries covered by the OECD’s indices, as well as with a
typical measure of labor market churn and dynamism (the probability of entering and exiting employment), which can be constructed
for a limited set of countries along the lines of Elsby, Hobijn, and
Sahin (2013), as described in Online Annex 2.2.C.
17This is consistent with Perri and Quadrini (2018), who develop a
model of global, synchronized recessions that follow from cross-border
transmission of liquidity shortages in highly integrated capital markets. The extensive cross-border financial links—particularly among
advanced economies—on the eve of the crisis was unprecedented and
may have compounded countries’ vulnerabilities. See also Chapter 4 of

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN

There is a similar pattern for postcrisis investment
deviations among countries that did not experience a
banking crisis in 2007–08 (Online Annex Table 2.2.6).
In particular, countries with stronger trade ties to
advanced economies going into the crisis experienced
larger deviations in investment during 2011–13
relative to precrisis trends. This finding is consistent
with the earlier observation (Figure 2.6) that persistent
capital shortfalls were observed also in countries that
did not experience a banking crisis in 2007–08.
An important offsetting influence on weak demand
from advanced economies during this period was
demand from China. China’s 4 trillion yuan stimulus
during 2008–11 (close to 10 percent of 2008 GDP)
supported a large nationwide infrastructure expansion
and construction of social housing, with associated
favorable impacts on exporters of commodities and
heavy equipment (Ahuja and Nabar 2012). The results
in Online Annex Table 2.2.7 (summarized in Table 2.2),
grouped according to advanced and emerging market economies, indicate that economies whose export
baskets were more exposed to China before the crisis
benefited disproportionately in the aftermath from
higher exposure to China’s domestic demand (measured
as the share of trading partner demand accounted for by
China), especially among emerging market economies.

Precrisis Policies and Policy Frameworks
The incidence of bank crises in 2007–08 was a key
driver of subsequent losses. Regulatory and supervisory
structures may thus have played a preemptive role in
influencing subsequent damage. The bank regulation
index constructed by Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2013)
illustrates this link. Specifically, stronger restrictions in
2006 on banks’ ability to underwrite, broker, and deal
in securities; offer mutual fund products; and engage in
insurance underwriting, real estate investment, development, and management are associated with a lower
probability of a banking crisis during 2007–08 (Figure 2.10).18 However, the index measures the strength
of restrictions only on specific aspects of bank activity.
Other dimensions (for instance, strength of capital,
funding, and liquidity requirements; the accompanying
supervisory approach to stress-testing balance sheets;
the April 2009 WEO, which documents the role of international links
in transmitting financial stress across borders.
18The association shown here is robust to controlling for some
other influences on the likelihood of a bank crisis (Online Annex
Table 2.2.4).

Figure 2.10. Probability of Banking Crisis
(Probability)

Stronger restrictions in 2006 on banks’ ability to underwrite, broker, and deal in
securities; offer mutual fund products; and engage in insurance underwriting, real
estate investment, development, and management are associated with a lower
probability of banking crisis in 2007–08.
0.8

Probit
Logit
Linear probability model

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
–2

–1
0
1
Strength of restrictions on banking activities

2

Sources: Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2013); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Movement from left to right on the x-axis indicates stronger restrictions on
banking activities. Figure is based on Online Annex Table 2.2.3.

overall intensity of financial sector monitoring activity;
the porosity of the regulatory perimeter and opportunities for regulatory arbitrage) likely also played a role.
In general, the initial policy space available prior
to a crisis can affect the extent of activity decline
afterward (Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia, and Mauro 2010;
Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor 2016; Romer and Romer
2018). For the 2008 episode specifically, countries
with smaller increases in general government debt
over 2005–08 experienced smaller losses relative to
trends (Table 2.2). Countries with lower public sector
borrowing requirements going into the crisis appear
to have had more room to deploy fiscal policy for
demand support in the immediate aftermath.
Policy frameworks also appear to matter for postcrisis output outcomes. Exchange rate flexibility is associated with less damage, pointing to a buffering role of
nominal exchange rates (Table 2.2). This finding may,
in part, reflect the difficulties experienced by some
euro area economies. In these countries, the absence
of an independent nominal exchange rate, together
with fiscal stress and the lack of a common area-wide
International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

81

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 2.11. Postcrisis Deviations of Euro Area and
Other Advanced Economies
(Percent)

The median and PPP GDP-weighted mean of output loss for euro area economies
are higher than for other advanced economies.
Euro area

0

Other advanced economies

1. Median

–2
–4
–6
–8
–10
–12

0

2011–13

2015–17

2. PPP GDP-Weighted Mean

–2
–4
–6
–8
–10
–12

2011–13

2015–17

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Other advanced economies are advanced economies that are not in the euro
area. PPP = purchasing power parity.

banking union and fiscal backstop, meant the burden
of adjustment after the crisis fell entirely on domestic
prices and output.
The median output loss for euro area economies is
notably higher than for other advanced economies in
2011–13 (Figure 2.11), covering an intense phase of
the sovereign debt crisis, deposit flight from stressed
euro area economies, and financial fragmentation
within the euro area (see IMF 2012, 2013a). The difference in losses widened through 2015–17, pointing
to a weaker recovery compared with other advanced
economies. The divergence may, in part, reflect the
limited policy levers available within a currency union
for adjustment to asymmetric shocks, differences in
the speed of financial sector repair (as discussed in
82

Box 2.3), and—despite substantial progress toward a
banking union and the creation of the European Stability Mechanism for crisis management—remaining
gaps in the euro area architecture.19

Extraordinary Actions Taken in the Aftermath
of the Crisis
Several countries took exceptional and unprecedented
policy measures to support their economies after the
2008 financial crisis. In many cases, notably among the
advanced economies most severely affected by the crisis,
the measures comprised (1) central bank monetary policy actions—unconventional monetary policy support
through asset purchases as policy rates approached their
effective lower bounds, and liquidity support to specific
segments of credit markets through targeted central
bank facilities; (2) discretionary fiscal stimulus; and (3)
financial sector operations—bank balance sheet stress
tests, government guarantees of banking sector liabilities, purchases of toxic assets from banks, and capital
injections. Central banks also established ad hoc bilateral swap lines to support foreign exchange liquidity in
jurisdictions beyond home markets.
Advanced economy monetary policy actions, in
particular, represented a significant change in the
approach to providing monetary accommodation—
necessitated in some cases by central banks rapidly
reducing policy rates to their effective lower bounds
during the crisis (Bernanke 2017). The particular mix
of tools varied across individual cases, but generally
included a combination of quantitative easing (massive balance sheet expansion with purchases mainly of
government bonds, mortgage-backed securities, and
corporate bonds); state-dependent forward guidance
(specifying particular levels of unemployment and
inflation as conditions for rate hikes); negative interest
rates (charging commercial banks a penalty on excess
reserves held at the central bank); and yield-curve
control (targeting the yields of longer-maturity government bonds through central bank purchases).
Estimates of the impact of advanced economy
central banks’ quantitative easing on interest rates and
financial conditions vary (Gagnon 2016). In general,
the positive effect of the actions on domestic output in
19Thomsen (2017); Arnold and others (2018); and Berger,
Dell’Ariccia, and Obstfeld (2018) discuss the reforms implemented
to strengthen the euro area architecture and the remaining steps to
complete the banking and fiscal union.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN

Table 2.3. Financial Sector Support and Discretionary Fiscal Stimulus in Group of Twenty Economies
(Percent of GDP)

1. Headline Support for the Financial Sector (as of February 2009)
Capital
Injection
G20 Average (PPP GDP-weighted)
Advanced Economies
Advanced Europe
Emerging Markets

(A)
2.0
2.9
2.4
0.3

Purchase of
Central Bank
Central Bank
Assets, Lending Support with
Liquidity
by Treasury Treasury Backing
Support
(B)
3.3
5.0
3.6
0.1

(C)
1.0
1.2
2.1
0.3

(D)
9.2
12.9
1.0
1.8

Guarantees

Total

(E)
14.3
21.3
19.5
0.2

(A+B+C+D+E)
29.8
43.3
28.6
2.7

2. Crisis-Related Discretionary Fiscal Stimulus in G20 Economies (as of October 2010)
2009
2010
2011
G20 Average
2.1
2.1
1.1
Advanced Economies
1.9
2.1
1.2
Emerging Markets
2.4
2.0
0.9
Sources: IMF (2009); IMF Fiscal Affairs and Monetary and Capital Markets departments database on public interventions; Chapter 1 of the November 2010
Fiscal Monitor.
Note: Panel 1 is calculated based on country statistics originally published in IMF (2009). The data on guarantees for Australia are based on Schwartz and Tan
(2016). In panel 1, G20 calculations do not include Mexico and South Africa. G20 = Group of Twenty.

advanced economies and imports from trading partners
is believed to have outweighed negative effects as a
result of elevated capital inflows and currency appreciation pressure elsewhere (IMF 2014). More broadly,
quantitative easing may have also helped stabilize activity by reducing the tail risk of debilitating asset price
declines. Nevertheless, the actions were the subject of
controversy, with policymakers in emerging market
and developing economies, at times, raising concern
about adverse spillovers from advanced economy central banks’ unconventional monetary policy approaches
(Mantega 2010; Zhou 2010; Rajan 2014).
The analysis in this chapter focuses on the impact
of fiscal and quasi-fiscal measures in support of the
financial sector undertaken by some economies in
the aftermath of the crisis (Table 2.3). The Group
of Twenty (G20) economies, for example, on average, injected discretionary fiscal stimulus of just over
2 percent of GDP in 2009 and 2010. (The IMF
was among the early advocates of the effort in the
days leading up to the November 2008 G20 Summit.)20 The number of such actions is larger than the
20During 2008 and 2009, the G20 forum (Argentina, Australia,
Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy,
Japan, Mexico, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, South Korea,
Turkey, United Kingdom, United States, European Union) was pivotal in forging international consensus on fiscal expansion, augmenting the lending resources of the IMF and multilateral development
banks, and the need to strengthen financial regulation (see https://​
www​.g20​.org/​en/​g20/​timeline). For the IMF’s November 2008 call
for fiscal stimulus by the G20 economies, see http://​www​.imf​.org/​en/​
News/​Articles/​2015/​09/​14/​01/​49/​pr08278.

instances of asset purchase programs by advanced
economy central banks and therefore more easily studied in a regression framework to assess their impact on
output deviations.
Estimating the immediate effect of the actions is
difficult. In the case of discretionary fiscal stimulus,
for example, causality runs in both directions, with
larger output collapses likely to prompt larger policy
responses, all else equal. It is nonetheless possible to
detect lagged effects of the measures on output deviations from precrisis trends averaged over 2015–17.
As shown in Figure 2.12, conditional on the size of
initial losses during 2011–13, quasi-fiscal actions taken
to stabilize the financial sector helped limit damage
during 2015–17. Overall headline support for the
financial sector has a statistically significant positive
correlation with subsequent output deviations from
trend; among the specific actions, capital injections
and guarantees appear to have helped limit subsequent
output losses. These interventions may have helped
thaw credit markets, and resumption of credit services
subsequently contributed to raising output.
Beyond action at the national level, as discussed
in Chapter 2 of the October 2018 GFSR, there were
extensive multilateral efforts to strengthen financial
regulatory standards (aimed at expanding the regulatory perimeter, containing the buildup of systemic
risk, strengthening resilience to shocks, and developing resolution frameworks). Multilateral cooperation
also helped craft an important component of the
monetary response to the crisis, with the IMF proInternational Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

83

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Summary

Figure 2.12. Impact on 2015–17 GDP Deviations from
One Standard Deviation Increase in Drivers
(Percent)

Actions taken to stabilize the ﬁnancial sector helped limit damages during
2015–17. Overall headline support for the ﬁnancial sector has a statistically
signiﬁcant positive correlation with subsequent output deviations from precrisis
trend. Among speciﬁc actions, capital injections and guarantees have helped limit
subsequent output losses.

**

Total headline support for
ﬁnancial and other sectors

*

Capital injections

Purchase of assets and
lending by treasury

*

Guarantees
(excluding deposit
insurance)
0

1
2
3
Percent deviations from precrisis trend

4

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Movement from left to right on the x-axis indicates less negative/more
positive deviations from precrisis trend. Extraordinary measures were taken during
2008–09. Coefﬁcient bars correspond to estimates in Online Annex Table 2.2.8.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

viding unconditional financial resources to its members through a general allocation of SDR 204 billion
($316 billion) during August–September 2009.21 In
addition, several economies relied on the global financial safety net to ease their adjustment to the funding
shock after the crisis. The IMF, for example, approved
SDR 420 billion in support to its members during
2008–13, of which SDR 119 billion was drawn
during that interval.22

21The IMF’s special drawing right (SDR), an international reserve
asset based on a basket comprising the US dollar, Chinese renminbi,
Japanese yen, euro, and British pound, is a claim on freely usable
currencies of IMF members. The 2009 general SDR allocation
augmented IMF members’ international reserves, with the aim of
easing postcrisis liquidity constraints (https://​www​.imf​.org/​en/​News/​
Articles/​2015/​09/​14/​01/​49/​pr09283).
22The gross figure includes precautionary arrangements. See IMF
(2015) for details.

84

The 2008 financial crisis had its roots in the US
housing boom of the preceding half-decade. Its impact
was seen worldwide from shuttered maquiladora factories in Mexico to the restructuring of regional savings
and loan cajas in Spain and extended joblessness for
migrant workers in China’s Pearl River Delta. Output
losses following the 2008 financial meltdown were persistent and experienced by a broad set of countries, not
just the group afflicted by banking crises at the time.
Protracted weak investment after the crisis was a major
contributing factor, associated with persistent shortfalls
in capital and total factor productivity, relative to precrisis trends, and slower technology adoption among
countries hit harder by the crisis.
The crisis prompted a still-ongoing rethink of the
nature of economic fluctuations, as well as of the
role of policy frameworks and measures to combat
downturns. The policy lessons of the crisis discussed
in this chapter follow from the lens adopted to view
its aftermath and to understand why the recovery
appeared so slow in many countries. Other important
developments covered in previous WEO reports, such
as the declining share of labor income (Chapter 3 of
the April 2017 WEO), subdued wage growth, and the
rise of part-time work (Chapter 2 of the October 2017
WEO), pose additional policy challenges for ensuring
the income security and welfare of those who rely
mostly on their labor income.
The evidence documented in this chapter suggests
that policy choices in the run-up to the crisis and in
its immediate aftermath influenced postcrisis output performance in multiple ways. Stronger banking
regulation—proxied by restrictions on certain aspects
of bank activity—appears to have played a preventive
role by lowering the probability of a banking crisis in
2007–08. The finding is relevant for ongoing debates
on rolling back the regulatory standards adopted following the crisis.
Countries with stronger fiscal positions entering the
crisis suffered smaller losses, suggesting that greater
room for policy maneuver may have helped defend
against harm. Extraordinary fiscal and quasi‑fiscal
actions to support the financial sector after the crisis
appear to have helped lessen output losses over the
medium term. Economies that moved quickly to assess
the health of their banking systems and recapitalize
banks appeared to have suffered smaller output losses
subsequently. As IMF (2013c), Auerbach (2017),

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN

Blanchard and Summers (2017), and Furman (2018)
note, there is renewed recognition of discretionary
fiscal policy as a countercyclical demand management
tool. Moreover, as the analysis shows, China’s large
fiscal stimulus during 2008–11 appears to have had
favorable spillovers on trading partners. Altogether, the
evidence presented here suggests some confirmation
of the efficacy of fiscal measures in limiting persistent
losses after a recession. And as noted in earlier IMF
research (IMF 2014), unconventional monetary policy
actions by advanced economy central banks helped
limit output declines and employment losses at home
while supporting imports from abroad.
The policy efforts of the past decade helped forestall an even worse outcome with deeper output and
employment losses. After faltering at times over the
past 10 years, the global economic recovery experienced a long-awaited synchronized growth upswing in
2017–18. Nevertheless, large challenges loom for the
global economy. The extraordinary policy actions to
prevent a second Great Depression have had important
side effects. The extended period of ultralow interest
rates in advanced economies has contributed to the

buildup of financial vulnerabilities, as discussed in the
April and October 2018 GFSRs. The large accumulation of public debt and the erosion of fiscal buffers
in many economies following the crisis point to the
urgency of rebuilding those defenses to prepare for the
next downturn. Moreover, some of the crisis management tools deployed in 2008–09 are no longer available
(the Federal Reserve’s bailouts of individual institutions,
for example), suggesting financial rescues in the future
may not be able to follow the same playbook.
Beyond these aspects, more fundamental challenges
relate to long-lasting legacies of the crisis. There are
already signs of possible long-term consequences of
the crisis on potential growth through its impacts on
migration, fertility, and future labor input (Box 2.1).
And societal support for openness and global economic
integration appears to have weakened in many countries after the crisis. The corollary of these developments is the rising appeal of protectionist nostrums
and populism. A fuller reckoning of such long-lasting
legacies of the 2008 financial crisis must necessarily
await the broader perspective that will emerge with
further passage of time.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

85

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Box 2.1. The Global Financial Crisis, Migration, and Fertility
Empirical and anecdotal evidence suggest that
changes in economic performance affect migration
flows and fertility rates. This box explores the relationships between postcrisis economic performance,
policies, migration, and fertility. The main finding of
the box is that postcrisis economic performance had
a significant impact on both migration and fertility. Through these channels, the crisis has likely left
long-lasting scars on future growth. The box also identifies several policies associated with significant impacts
on migration and fertility.

Figure 2.1.1. International Migration and the
Global Financial Crisis

The Great Recession and Migration

–1

The decades leading up to the global financial crisis saw large increases in net migration
(immigration-emigration) rates between advanced
economies.1 This trend, however, reversed after the
crisis. Meanwhile, net migration has been consistently neutral in emerging markets through both
periods, while low-income developing countries have
increased net migration rates in the postcrisis years,
even as they are generally more prone to volatile net
migration rates (Figure 2.1.1, panel 1). Motivated by
this heterogeneity of net migration among country groups, the analysis examines the relationship
between the changes in trends before and after the
crisis, looking at per capita GDP and migration
flows by using data on migration inflows from
143 source countries to 20 destination advanced
economies.2
Immigrants are typically more vulnerable to
economic shocks than natives. They are often overrepresented in sectors most sensitive to the business
cycle (OECD 2009) and may face discrimination in
a tight labor market (Arai and Vilhelmsson 2004).
Immigrants have also responded to changes in labor
demand more strongly than natives (Kahanec and
Guzi 2017). Simple correlations confirm the conjec-

–2

The authors of this box are Christopher Johns, Mico Mrkaic,
and Yuan Zeng.
1Net migration rate is defined as the number of immigrants
minus the number of emigrants over a period, divided by the
person-years lived by the population of the destination country
over that period. It is expressed as net number of migrants per
1,000 population.
2The analysis uses migration inflows, given that inflows are
tracked more precisely and more frequently than bilateral migration outflows and migrant stocks. Data on bilateral migration
inflows facilitates accurate analysis of the push and pull factors
influencing international migration.

86

AEs

EMs

LIDCs

4 1. Net Migration Rate
(per 1,000 of population)
3
2
1
0

Percent change in emigration rate,
2014–16 versus 2005–08

–3
1980

85

90

95

2000

05

10

15

140 2. Output Losses and Emigration
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
–20
–40
–60
–80
–100
–0.3 –0.2 –0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Source country GDP per capita losses, 2011–13

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development; United Nations Department of Economic and
Social Affairs, World Population Prospects: The 2017
Revision; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging market
economies; LIDCs = low-income developing countries. Net
migration rate by country group is population-weighted average.
Losses are based on calculations in Online Annex 2.2.B.

ture that migrants respond to economic performance
(Figure 2.1.1, panel 2), measured by the deviations
of GDP per capita from precrisis trend (calculated as
described in Online Annex 2.2.B).
Beyond the correlations, the analysis explores the
links between economic performance and migration in a multivariate setting, controlling for the
additional main drivers mentioned in the October
2016 World Economic Outlook—structural factors
and immigration policies. While the box’s discussion
centers on the role of economic factors in migration decisions, it should be mentioned that some

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN

Box 2.1 (continued)
migration decisions are driven entirely by such factors
as political instability and war in the source country
or region. To avoid biasing results, migration flows
data exclude flows of refugees and asylum seekers.3
Figure 2.1.2, panel 1 shows the impact of losses in
GDP per capita on differences between emigration
rates in 2011–13 and 2014–16 compared with years
before the crisis (2005–08).4 Losses in GDP per capita significantly impact migration flows in the short
and medium terms. In addition to economic performance, migration flows are affected by the strength of
poverty constraints in source countries5 and the GDP
per capita in the destination relative to the source
country, education in destination and source countries, and the distance between destination country
and source country.6,7
Policies imposed in the wake of the crisis to limit
migration and reduce competition in labor markets
also affect migration (Figure 2.1.2, panel 2). The
analysis examines restrictions on legal entry, stay,
and quotas (an increase in each variable denotes
greater restrictiveness). Increased postcrisis restrictions significantly reduced migration flows, mostly
in the medium term, over and above the impact of
economic losses.

The Great Recession and Fertility
During a recession, relatively elevated unemployment rates may lead to deferred decisions on marriage, having children, or both. In nearly all recent
recessions in advanced economies, the impact on
fertility has been mainly to postpone births, which
contributes to a short-run reduction in the number
of births in the aftermath (long-run effects tend to be

3Inflows of foreign population data are from the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD).
Refugees and asylum seekers are excluded from the data for all
countries except: Germany, Netherlands, and Norway—included
if living in private households (as opposed to reception centers
or hostels for immigrants); and United Kingdom—included if
stayed in country longer than one year.
4Emigration rate is defined as inflows to destination country
from source country over a period, divided by 1,000 population
in source country.
5Defined as the disposable income Gini coefficient divided by
the square of PPP GDP per capita.
6Distance is defined as great-circle distance between most
populated cities in destination country and source country.
7Controls based on measures used in Borjas (1987); Hatton and
Williamson (2002); and Clark, Hatton, and Williamson (2007).

Figure 2.1.2. Impact on Emigration Rate from
One Standard Deviation Increase in Drivers at
Different Horizons
(Percentage points)

Short term

Medium term

1. Effect of GDP per Capita Losses
GDP per capita losses (D)
GDP per capita losses (S)
Education level (D)
Education level (S)
Poverty constraint (S), 2005–08
GDP per capita (D/S), 2005–08
Distance

–20

–10

0

10

20

2. Effect of Policies
GDP per capita losses (D)
GDP per capita losses (S)
Legal entry (D), 2011–13
Quotas (D), 2011–13
Poverty constraint (S), 2005–08
GDP per capita (D/S), 2005–08
Distance
–20 –10
0
10
20
Average percent change from
precrisis migration rate

Sources: International Migration Institute; Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development; Standardized World
Income Inequality Database (Solt 2016); World Bank, World
Development Indicators database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Explanatory variables are contemporaneous with
dependent variable unless noted otherwise. All postcrisis
variables except GDP per capita losses are average changes
from precrisis (2005–08) levels. Losses are based on
calculations in Online Annex 2.2.B. All coefﬁcients are
statistically signiﬁcant at 5 percent. Increases in policy variables
correspond to increases in restrictiveness. S = source country;
D = destination country. Short term = 2011–13 average;
Medium term = 2014–16 average.

less pronounced).8 Although immigration may be a
partial solution for low fertility and an aging population in the short term, in the long term, immigrants’
8Neels

(2010); Cherlin, Cumberworth, and Morgan (2013).

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

87

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Box 2.1 (continued)
Figure 2.1.3. Total Fertility Rate

Figure 2.1.4. Impact of Crisis Exposure on
Fertility Rate at Different Horizons

(Number of births per woman)
OECD
Italy

AEs
Spain

EMs
Greece

United States

(Average change in fertility rate on x-axis;
postcrisis minus precrisis)
Short term

Medium term

2.2

*

2.0
GDP losses
1.8

*

1.6
GDP per capita losses
1.4

***

1.2
Employment losses
***

1.0
2000

02

04

06

08

10

12

14

16
–0.10 –0.05

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD); World Bank, World Development
Indicators database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: OECD is the average fertility rate for OECD and partner
countries. AEs = OECD and partner advanced economies;
EMs = OECD and partner emerging market economies. See
Online Annex 2.1 for country list.

fertility rates generally converge to that of natives
(Espenshade 1994).
In the decade before the crisis, the total fertility rate
rose in several advanced economies, only to decline
afterward (Figure 2.1.3).9 In the United States, the
rate fell from a peak of 2.12 in 2007 to 1.8 in 2016.
Similarly, the birth rate of foreign-born women (ages
15–50) in the United States declined by 16 births per
thousand women from its peak of 76 in 2008 to its
2016 level. For European countries, such as Greece
and Spain that suffered a double-dip recession, the
fertility rate decreased from 1.5 to about 1.3 over the
9Total fertility rate in a specific year is defined as the total
number of children that would be born to each woman if she
were to live to the end of her child-bearing years and give birth
to children in alignment with the prevailing age-specific fertility
rates. It is calculated by aggregating age-specific fertility rates as
defined over five-year intervals.

88

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Explanatory variables are contemporaneous with
dependent variable. Average changes in fertility rate are the
difference between postcrisis term and precrisis (2005–08) level.
Losses are based on calculations in Online Annex 2.2.B. Short
term = 2011–13 average; Medium term = 2015–16 average.
* p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.

same time span. These persistently low fertility rates
over the past decade may weigh on future labor input
and thus weaken potential growth in the long run.
Evidence from OECD and partner countries shows
that average changes in the fertility rate for the postcrisis period relative to the precrisis period (2005–08)
have been negatively impacted by the crisis through
several channels, of which employment losses were
the most significant (Figure 2.1.4). Further evidence
in the literature (Sobotka, Skirbekk, and Philipov
2011) shows that other complex social changes (higher
female labor participation rate, smaller desired family
size, and so on) and burdened welfare systems could
affect women’s reproductive decisions.
The fertility rate can be affected by labor market
policies as well. Figure 2.1.5 shows how policies

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN

Box 2.1 (continued)
affected fertility after the crisis. On one hand, the
result in panel 1 demonstrates that a higher precrisis
tax wedge on couples reduces fertility in the short
term. On the other hand, panel 2 suggests that postcrisis increases in family allowances and improvements
in job protection during maternity are associated
with higher fertility rates. These findings are in line
with evidence and case studies from European Union
countries.10

Figure 2.1.5. Impact on Fertility from One
Standard Deviation Increase in Drivers at
Different Horizons

(Average change in fertility rate on x-axis; postcrisis
minus precrisis)
Short term

Medium term

1. Effect of Precrisis Policies
Public spending on
child education and care
Child-care beneﬁts
Family allowance

**

Total protected
maternity leave
Average tax wedge
of couple

–0.10 –0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15
2. Effect of Policy Changes
Public spending on
child education and care
Child-care beneﬁts

**

Total protected
maternity leave
Average tax wedge
of couple

***

Family allowance

–0.10 –0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15

10See, for example, Hoem (2008), Kalwij (2010), and
Thévenon (2011).

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Explanatory variables are contemporaneous with
dependent variable. Precrisis policy variables are average of
period 2005–08. Policy changes are average postcrisis
changes from precrisis (2005–08) levels. Average changes
in fertility rate are of difference between postcrisis term and
precrisis (2005–08) level. Short term = 2011–13 average;
Medium term = 2015–16 average.
* p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

89

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Box 2.2. The Employment Impact of Automation Following the Global Financial Crisis: The Case of
Industrial Robots
As discussed in the chapter, an important change in
the production process after the global financial crisis
appears to be the pace of technology adoption. This box
addresses the following questions related to technology
adoption, using the example of industrial robots: How
did the diffusion of robots affect employment in the
aftermath of the crisis? What type of workers were particularly affected? Did certain labor market policies alter
the impact of robot adoption on employment?
Forces of automation were at work prior to the
crisis (Autor, Levy, and Murnane 2003; Goos and
Manning 2007; Acemoglu and Autor 2011; Autor
and Dorn 2013), and one much-discussed aspect of
the transformation of the workplace is the diffusion
of industrial robots. Yet, existing work has mostly
focused on exploring precrisis diffusion of automation
in the United States (Autor, Levy, and Murnane 2003;
Acemoglu and Autor 2011; Autor and Dorn 2013;
Acemoglu and Restrepo 2017), and in a few European
countries (Graetz and Michaels forthcoming; Chiacchio,
Petropoulos, and Pichler 2018). Thus, less is known
about postcrisis robot diffusion in and beyond these
countries. Exploring these recent developments may
provide some perspective on possible future workplace
dynamics and labor market outcomes, where artificial-​
intelligence-powered equipment is expected to replace
human input in an expanding range of nonroutine
tasks (Berg, Buffie, and Zanna 2017; Frey and Osborne
2017; Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2018 and forthcoming).

Effect of Robot Diffusion on Employment
As noted in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017), robot
diffusion can affect employment in different ways.
Greater diffusion of robots can affect employment
negatively through displacement (by directly replacing
workers performing certain tasks), but also positively,
through productivity gains, as robots can free up
human labor for other tasks, incentivize investment,
and create employment.
Estimation results show that increased robot
diffusion in industries located in countries with more
negative output losses during the crisis is associated
with lower employment growth (Figure 2.2.1) in the

Figure 2.2.1. Effect of Robot Diffusion on
Employment Growth
(Percent)

All
High output loss
Low output loss

0.04

1. All Countries

0.02
0.00
–0.02
***

–0.04
0.04
0.02

2. Advanced Economies

Displacement effect
dominates

0.00
–0.02
–0.04
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.8

***
3. Emerging Markets

**

Productivity effect
dominates

Sources: IFR (2017); World Input-Output Database; and IMF
staff calculations.
Note: Robot diffusion is deﬁned as average change in robot
shipments/1,000 hours worked 2010–14. Error bars around
coefﬁcient estimate are two standard errors. Losses are
based on calculations in Online Annex 2.2.B. Figure is based
on coefﬁcients in Online Annex Table 2.3.4.
* p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.

The authors of this box are Wenjie Chen and Malhar Nabar.

90

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN

Box 2.2 (continued)
aftermath of the crisis. This is particularly driven by
industries in advanced economies with relatively bigger
output deviations relative to precrisis trend. In emerging markets with relatively lower output deviations
relative to precrisis trend, increased robot diffusion is
associated with higher employment growth.

Hollowing Out of the Employment-Skills
Distribution
The negative association between labor and robot
diffusion appears to be more pronounced in industries initially more reliant on medium-skilled workers. The effect is largely seen in advanced economies
(Figure 2.2.2). This finding is consistent with the
hollowing-out effects documented by Autor, Levy, and
Murnane (2003), and Goos, Manning, and Salomons (2014).

Labor Market Policies
To explore whether labor market policies can mitigate the impact of robot diffusion on employment,
regression analysis is conducted on samples divided by
the severity of crisis exposure.1
A consistent picture emerges (Figure 2.2.3): the
postcrisis displacement effect of robots on employment was more pronounced in countries with more
rigid labor market policies and less labor market
dynamism (churn) prior to the crisis.2 More specifically, lower active labor market spending as a share of
GDP, stricter dismissal policies, less churn in the labor
market, and more stringent employment protection
legislation are associated with higher displacement
effects of robot diffusion in countries that experienced
relatively high output losses.

Figure 2.2.2. Hollowing-Out Effect of Robot
Diffusion on Employment Growth
(Percent)

High medium-skill share
Low medium-skill share

0.06 1. All Countries
0.04
0.02
0.00
–0.02
–0.04

**

–0.06
–0.08
–0.10
0.06 2. Advanced Economies
0.04

Hollowing-out effect

0.02
0.00
–0.02
–0.04

**

–0.06
–0.08
–0.10
1.0 3. Emerging Markets
0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
–2.0
–2.5

1Four

specific measures of labor market policy are under
consideration: (1) active labor market policy (ALMP) spending
as share of GDP, (2) ease of dismissal index by Cambridge
University’s Center for Business Research, (3) labor churn
as calculated in Online Annex 2.2.B, and (4) employment
protection legislation index compiled by the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development. All measures are
calculated as precrisis averages to capture the initial extent of
labor market rigidities.
2Labor market dynamism, also referred to as job churn, is
measured as described in Online Annex 2.2.B, following Elsby,
Hobijn, and Sahin (2013).

Sources: IFR (2017); World Input-Output Database (WIOD);
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Robot diffusion is deﬁned as robot shipment/1,000
hours worked. Level of worker skills is based on education
attainment from WIOD. Medium-skilled workers have
attained secondary and/or postsecondary nontertiary
education in 2009. Error bars around coefﬁcient estimate
are two standard errors. Figure is based on coefﬁcients in
Online Annex Table 2.3.5.
* p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

91

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Box 2.2 (continued)
Figure 2.2.3. Labor Market Policies and
Effect of Robot Diffusion on Employment
Growth

(Average change in employment growth, 2010–14)
ALMP
Dismissal

0.20

Job churn
EPL

1. High Output Losses

0.15
0.10
0.05

In sum, industries in advanced economies with relatively bigger output losses experienced displacement
effects from robot diffusion in the aftermath of the
crisis. This negative effect on employment growth was
particularly severe in industries in advanced economies
with relatively large shares of medium-skilled workers.
At the same time, in countries with more rigid labor
market policies and less churn, the labor displacement effect of robot diffusion was more pronounced,
suggesting that policies supportive of creating more
flexible labor markets can help absorb employment
displacement associated with automation.

0.00
–0.05

***

–0.10
–0.15

0.20

***

***

**

More ﬂexible
labor market

Less ﬂexible
labor market

2. Low Output Losses

0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
–0.05
–0.10
–0.15

More ﬂexible
labor market

Less ﬂexible
labor market

Sources: Cambridge University Center for Business Research
(CBR); IFR (2017); Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development; World Input-Output Database; and IMF
staff calculations.
Note: More ﬂexible labor market comprises countries that
have above-median ALMP spending (percent of GDP),
above-median job churn rates, below-median dismissal
regulations as measured by CBR, and below-median EPL.
Error bars around coefﬁcient estimate are two standard
errors. Losses are based on calculations in Online Annex
2.2.B. Figure is based on coefﬁcients in Online Annex Table
2.3.6. ALMP = active labor market policy; EPL = employment
protection legislation.
* p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.

92

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN

Box 2.3. The Role of Financial Sector Repair in the Speed of the Recovery

The author of this box is Deniz Igan.

Figure 2.3.1. Containment and Resolution
Fiscal costs of bank restructuring
(percent of GDP)

50 1. Unadjusted Cost and Support
40
y = 0.639x + 1.740
R 2 = 0.223

30
20
10
0

0

10

20
30
40
50
Liquidity support
(% of total deposits and liabilities to nonresidents)
2. Cost and Support Adjusted for Crisis
Severity

7

Fiscal costs of bank restructuring
(divided by peak NPL)

As the financial crisis started rattling markets,
policymakers broadly followed the crisis management
rulebook: step one—stop panic from spreading (containment phase), step two—repair the damage (resolution phase). The principal forms of intervention were
(1) liquidity provision through collateralized lending
and other arrangements; (2) support for short-term
wholesale funding markets; (3) (more extensive)
guarantees of retail deposits and other liabilities; (4)
purchases or exchanges of nonperforming or illiquid
assets; and (5) capital injections to banks. Interventions often started with liquidity support to relieve the
immediate pressure and then moved on to identifying
and meeting recapitalization needs.
Yet the timing and strength of the response varied
across countries, especially when it came to the challenge of repairing the damage (Figure 2.3.1). Part of
the variation certainly reflected when and how severely
a country was affected, plus how large the banking sector was relative to GDP, but there are differences even
after controlling for crisis severity. Specific forms of
intervention also differed. Some governments acquired
minority stakes in distressed banks while others chose
to close or nationalize them. Stress tests were introduced to restore confidence, with different approaches
in design and governance. Sometimes, but not always,
measures aiming to reduce debt overhang in the
nonfinancial sector accompanied the interventions
targeted at the financial institutions. Last but not least,
cross-country differences in structural features, such as
resolution frameworks, bankruptcy regimes, and the
degree to which the system depended on bank- versus
market-based financing, came into focus.
Drawing on this variation, several insights can be
gained from comparing crisis management in the
United States and in Europe:
• The containment phases were fairly similar. The
major central banks were quick to offer liquidity
support through traditional facilities and established
unconventional facilities to ensure that pressure in
funding markets subsided. They also established
swap lines as early as December 2007 and extended
these to other central banks as the crisis spread. In
many respects, the response in the containment
phase was better coordinated internationally during
the recent crisis than in past crises (Laeven and
Valencia 2013).

6
5
4

y = 0.247x + 0.808
R 2 = 0.059

3
2
1
0

0

1

2

3
4
5
Liquidity support
(Divided by peak NPL)

6

7

Sources: Laeven and Valencia (2013); and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: To adjust for crisis severity, ﬁscal costs of bank
restructuring and liquidity support are divided by the peak
NPL. NPL = nonperforming loan ratio.

• The resolution phases diverged more, laying bare
stark differences in regulatory and supervisory architecture across the two regions.
• The United States mobilized recapitalization plans
faster than did countries in the European Union
(EU) (Figure 2.3.2).
• In addition to speed, the actions taken in the
United States were more decisive. Banks replenished
their eroded capital base by issuing new equity
early in the crisis, whereas, in the EU, there was
no matching effort (Figure 2.3.3). At least in part,
this was driven by the supervisory approach: US
banks were compelled to raise fresh capital (and
were able to do so because of support from the

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

93

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Box 2.3 (continued)
Figure 2.3.2. Timing of Recapitalization

Figure 2.3.3. New Share Issuance by Banks

(Months)

(Percent)

5

1.2

United States

European Union

4
1.0

3
2

0.8

1
0.6

0
–1

0.4

–2
0.2

–3
–4

IRL

AUT
LVA

BEL
DNK

NLD
DEU

0.0

GBR
LUX

Sources: Laeven and Valencia (2013); and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: Timing is measured by the months between moments
when liquidity support became extensive and implementation
of recapitalization. Data labels use International Organization
for Standardization (ISO) country codes.

Federal Reserve and other agencies); EU banks
were instructed to improve their risk-weighted
capital ratios, but options were left open on how to
do that. Faced with tight funding conditions and
broader uncertainty, banks chose to cut lending and
increase their sovereign debt holdings—which carry
a zero risk weight under Basel III.
• Further, while stress tests were conducted on both
sides of the Atlantic, market perceptions of what
they accomplished differed. In the United States,
the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program aimed
to address uncertainty about the solvency of systemic institutions (Bernanke 2009). Moreover, the
Treasury Department committed to making capital
available to eligible banks. Test results were publicly
available on a bank-by-bank basis, providing the
needed information to nervous markets (Fernandes,
Igan, and Pinheiro 2015). In the European Union,
the Committee of European Banking Supervisors
conducted two rounds of tests. Individual results
were kept confidential in the 2009 round, though

94

2005 06

07

08

09

10

11

12

13

USA
Sources: Homar and van Wijnbergen (2015); and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: New share issuance by banks is measured by the
volume in percent of the consolidated balance sheet.

released in the 2010 exercise. The scenarios were
criticized for being too benign and not capturing
the risk of sovereign default—a major concern
at the time (Abramovich 2011).1 Moreover, the
newly created European Financial Stability Facility
(EFSF)—tasked with potential capital assistance—
could offer funding to member states by selling
bonds rather than investing directly in banks.2
Finally, despite the seal of approval gained by passing the stress tests, many banks continued to struggle. Taken together, these led markets to label the
exercise a “nonevent” with no useful information
content (Shah 2010).3 The EU experience under1Regulators reportedly chose not to include a default scenario
“partly because they said that a sovereign default was unlikely
and partly due to worries that it would send the wrong political
message” (Enrich 2010).
2The EFSF was succeeded by the European Stability Mechanism, which, under some conditions, can provide funding
directly to recapitalize banks.
3Regulators will prefer to fully reveal banks’ capital shortfall at times of crisis if they are able to recapitalize them, but
will hold onto some information if they cannot recapitalize
(Spargoli 2012).

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN

Box 2.3 (continued)
scored the importance of credibility—established
through independent governance, the requisite technical expertise, and clearly communicated plans for
any backstop needs (Ong and Pazarbasioglu 2013).
• Because the epicenter of the crisis in many countries
was housing markets, mortgage defaults became
endemic. In the United States, the Making Home
Affordable (MHA) program was introduced in
2009 to help struggling homeowners (Chapter 3
of the April 2012 World Economic Outlook). The
refinancing program under the MHA program,
in particular, provided substantial welfare gains to
highly indebted households (Mitman 2016) and
boosted consumption (Agarwal and others 2015).
In European countries caught up in their own
credit-fueled housing boom-bust, there were no
corresponding widespread programs at the outset
of the crisis. Nonperforming loan ratios increased
more than in the United States and remain high
(Figure 2.3.4).4
• More generally, many European countries continue
to grapple with large stocks of impaired assets a
decade after the onset of the crisis. A large confluence of factors—the global financial crisis hit many
hard and particularly hurt those with their own
homegrown bubbles (Claessens and others 2010)—
exposed the monetary union’s incomplete architecture and triggered a sovereign debt crisis, subjecting
banks to a second round of shocks. The deep and
prolonged economic downturn that followed further
weakened borrowers’ debt service capacity, leading
to an increase in loan defaults and large corporate
and household debt overhangs. The nonperforming loans are concentrated most notably in small
and medium-sized enterprises, which contribute
almost two-thirds of Europe’s output and employment and tend to rely more on bank financing than
large firms. In addition, many European countries
have bank-based financial systems.5 Together with
4Ireland and Spain were chosen for illustrative purposes as
they both had housing booms and busts and significant banking
distress. Other EU countries that could be used for direct
comparison (for example, Greece, Italy, Portugal) either did not
have a similar precrisis boom-bust pattern in housing markets, or
their experience was dominated by the sovereign debt crisis that
followed the global financial crisis.
5Market-based economies experience significantly and durably
stronger rebounds than those that are bank-based; in particular,
the more bank-based economies of continental Europe (Allard
and Blavy 2011).

Figure 2.3.4. Nonperforming Loan Ratio
(Percent)
30

United States

Ireland

Spain

25

20

15

10

5

0
2005 06

07

08

09

10

11

12

13

14

15

Source: World Bank, Global Financial Development Database.

the concentration of debt overhang in small and
medium-sized enterprises, this further amplified the
impact of the banks’ problems and debt overhang
on investment and consumption. Inadequate capital
buffers, prudential problems with collateral valuation
and treatment of nonperforming loans, legal obstacles
to debt enforcement, loan restructuring and foreclosure, and a lack of distressed debt markets have been
identified as primary obstacles to nonperforming
loan resolution (Aiyar and others 2015).
• A related point of comparison between the US and
EU experiences involves the resolution framework for
banks themselves. In the former, having an established resolution authority that can act independently
on the best option to resolve distressed banks (across
state borders)—the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation—helped ensure swift resolution of failing banks (although dealing with systemic financial
institutions required further action). In the latter, the
troubles of the banking system started a search for
new mechanisms that culminated in the creation of a
single supervisor and a unified resolution framework
(Goyal and others 2013).
The postcrisis paths for credit, investment, consumption, and growth differed accordingly (Figure 2.3.5).
The United States recovered faster and more strongly.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

95

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Box 2.3 (continued)
Figure 2.3.5. Postcrisis Paths
(Percent; 2007 = 100)

United States
120 1. Bank Credit

Ireland

Spain

2. Private
Investment

100

120
100

80
80
60
60

40
20
2000 04

08

12

140 3. Private
Consumption

16 2000

05

09

13

4. GDP

40
17
120

120

100

100
80

80
60
2000

05

09

13

17 2000

05

09

13

• Appropriate backstops: In extreme circumstances,
establishing credibility and preventing panic and
contagion may require use of public funds. In this
context, having enough fiscal room and mitigating the sovereign-bank nexus become crucial. Any
actual use of these backstops, however, should be
a last-resort measure accompanied by appropriate
burden sharing and clear exit strategies to minimize moral hazard, as well as the potential costs
associated with direct government involvement in
financial markets (for example, efficiency concerns).

60
17

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development; World Bank, World Development Indicators
database; and IMF staff calculations.

96

The deleveraging phase, notably, has been shorter and
more shallow—consistent with the importance of
repairing bank balance sheets in restoring growth.6
Summing up, comparison of the US and European
experiences and cross-country studies highlights the
following:
• Swift and decisive action: Recapitalizing or resolving
banks shortly after the containment phase is key.
The alternative leads to zombification, with significant macroeconomic costs. From a structural point
of view, resolution frameworks should aim to ensure
that such swift and decisive action is possible.

6Other evidence corroborates this insight: early and decisive
recapitalization of distressed banks helps corporate investment
recover (Sun and Tong 2015) and can take several years off the
duration of a recession (Homar and van Wijnbergen 2015).

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN

References
Abiad, Abdul, Ravi Balakrishnan, Petya Koeva Brooks, Daniel
Leigh, and Irina Tytell. 2009. “What’s the Damage? Medium-​
Term Output Dynamics after Banking Crises.” IMF Working
Paper 09/245, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Abramovich, Alexander. 2011. “Comparative Analysis of Stress
Testing in the United States and Europe.” North Carolina
Banking Institute 15 (1), Article 16, University of North
Carolina School of Law, Chapel Hill, NC.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Autor, David. 2011. “Skills, Tasks and
Technologies: Implications for Employment and Earnings.”
Handbook of Labor Economics, Elsevier.
Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor. 2011. “Skills, Tasks, and
Technologies: Implications for Employment and Earnings.” In
Handbook of Labor Economics (4), edited by Orley Ashenfelter
and David E. Card. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. 2017. “Robots and Jobs:
Evidence from US Labor Markets.” NBER Working Paper
23285, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
———. 2018. “Artificial Intelligence, Automation, and Work.”
NBER Working Paper 24196, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
———. Forthcoming. “The Race between Man and Machine:
Implications of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares, and
Employment.” American Economic Review.
Adams, Zoe, Louise Bishop, and Simon Deakin. 2016. CBR
Labour Regulation Index. Cambridge: Centre for Business
Research.
Adler, Gustavo, Romain Duval, Davide Furceri, Sinem Kiliç
Çelik, Ksenia Koloskova, and Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro.
2017. “Gone with the Headwinds: Global Productivity.” IMF
Staff Discussion Note 17/04, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Souphala Chomsisengphet,
Tomasz Piskorski, Amit Seru, and Vincent Yao. 2015. “Mortgage Refinancing, Consumer Spending, and Competition:
Evidence from the Home Affordable Refinancing Program.”
NBER Working Paper 21512, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Ahuja, Ashvin, and Malhar S. Nabar. 2012. “Investment-Led
Growth in China: Global Spillovers.” IMF Working Paper
12/267, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Aiyar, Shekhar, Wolfgang Bergthaler, Jose M. Garrido, Anna Ilyina, Andreas Jobst, Kenneth Kang, Dmitriy Kovtun, Yan Liu,
Dermot Monaghan, and Marina Moretti. 2015. “A Strategy
for Resolving Europe’s Problem Loans.” IMF Staff Discussion
Note 15/19, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Allard, Céline, Petya Koeva Brooks, John C. Bluedorn, Fabian
Bornhorst, Katharine Christopherson, Franziska Ohnsorge,
Tigran Poghosyan, and an IMF Staff Team. 2013. “Toward a
Fiscal Union for the Euro Area.” IMF Staff Discussion Note
13/09, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

Allard, Julien, and Rodolphe Blavy. 2011. “Market Phoenixes
and Banking Ducks: Are Recoveries Faster in Market-Based
Economies?” IMF Working Paper 11/213, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Arai, Mahmood, and Roger Vilhelmsson. 2004. “Unemployment-Risk Differentials between Immigrant and Native
Workers in Sweden.” Industrial Relations 43: 690–98.
Arnold, Nathaniel, Bergljot Barkbu, Elif Ture, Hou Wang, and
Jiaxiong Yao. 2018. “A Central Fiscal Stabilization Capacity
for the Euro Area.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 18/03, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Aslam, Aqib, Patrick Blagrave, Eugenio Cerutti, Sung Eun Jung,
and Carolina Osorio-Buitron. Forthcoming. “Recessions and
Recoveries: Are EMs Different from AEs?” IMF Working
Paper, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Auerbach, Alan. 2017. “Fiscal Policy.” Peterson Institute for
International Economics, Washington, DC.
Autor, David, and David Dorn. 2013. “The Growth of Low-Skill
Service Jobs and the Polarization of the U.S. Labor Market.”
American Economic Review 103 (5): 1553–1597.
Autor, David, Frank Levy, and Richard Murnane. 2003. “The
Skill Content of Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4):
1279–333.
Ball, Laurence. 2014. “Long-Term Damage from the Great
Recession in OECD Countries.” NBER Working Paper
20185, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
MA.
Barnichon, Regis, Christian Matthes, and Alexander Ziegenbein.
2018. “The Financial Crisis at 10: Will We Ever Recover?”
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter
2018–19, August.
Barth, James R., Gerard Caprio, Jr., and Ross Levine. 2013.
“Bank Regulation and Supervision in 180 Countries from
1999 to 2011.” NBER Working Paper 18733, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Bayoumi, Tamim. 2017. Unfinished Business: The Unexplored
Causes of the Financial Crisis and the Lessons Yet to Be Learned.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Berg, Andrew, Ed Buffie, and Felipe Zanna. 2017. “Should We
Fear the Robot Revolution? (The Correct Answer Is Yes).”
Manuscript prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester NYU Conference Series.
Berger, Helge, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and Maurice Obstfeld.
2018. “Revisiting the Economic Case for Fiscal Union in
the Euro Area.” Departmental Paper, Research Department,
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Berger, Helge, Thomas Dowling, Sergi Lanau, Weicheng Lian,
Mico Mrkaic, Pau Rabanal, and Marzie Taheri Sanjani. 2015.
“Steady as She Goes—Estimating Potential Output during
Financial ‘Booms and Busts’.” IMF Working Paper 15/233,
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Berkmen, S. Pelin, Gaston Gelos, Robert Rennhack, and James
P. Walsh. 2012. “The Global Financial Crisis: Explaining

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

97

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Cross-Country Differences in the Output Impact.” Journal of
International Money and Finance 31: 42–59.
Bernanke, Ben S. 2009. “Statement Regarding the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program.” May 7. http://www.federalreserve.gov/
newsevents/press/bcreg/bernankescap20090507.htm.
———. 2015. The Courage to Act: A Memoir of a Crisis and Its
Aftermath. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.
———. 2017. “Monetary Policy for a New Era.” Prepared for
conference titled “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy,”
Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington
DC, October 12–13.
———. 2018. “The Real Effects of Disrupted Credit: Evidence
from the Global Financial Crisis.” The Per Jacobsson Foundation Lecture, Bank for International Settlements, Basel,
and forthcoming in Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers.
2015. “Inflation and Activity—Two Explorations and Their
Monetary Policy Implications.” NBER Working Paper 21726,
National Bureau for Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and Paolo Mauro.
2010. “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy.” IMF Staff Position
Note 10/03, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Blanchard, Olivier, Hamid Faruqee, and Mitali Das. 2010. “The
Initial Impact of the Crisis on Emerging Market Countries.”
Brooking Papers on Economic Activity (Spring): 263–23.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Daniel Leigh. 2013. “Growth Forecast
Errors and Fiscal Multipliers.” American Economic Review 103
(3): 117–20.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Lawrence H. Summers. 2017. “Rethinking Stabilization Policy: Back to the Future.” Conference titled
“Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy,” Peterson Institute for
International Economics, Washington, DC, October 12–13.
Blinder, Alan S. 2013. After the Music Stopped: The Financial
Crisis, the Response, and the Work Ahead. New York, NY: The
Penguin Press.
Borjas, George J. 1987. “Self-Selection and the Earnings of
Immigrants.” American Economic Review 77 (4): 531–53.
Candelon, Bertrand, Alina Carare, Jean-Baptiste Hasse, and Jing
Lu. 2018. “Globalization and the New Normal.” IMF Working Paper 18/75, International Monetary Fund, Washington,
DC.
Cerra, Valerie, Ugo Panizza, and Sweta Saxena. 2013. “International Evidence on Recovery from Recessions.” Contemporary
Economic Policy 31 (2): 424–39.
Cerra, Valerie, and Sweta Saxena. 2008. “Growth Dynamics: The
Myth of Economic Recovery.” American Economic Review 98
(1): 439–57.
———. 2017. “Booms, Crises, and Recoveries: A New Paradigm of the Business Cycle and Its Policy Implications.”
IMF Working Paper 17/250, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Cherlin, Andrew, Erin Cumberworth, and Christopher Morgan.
2013. “The Effects of the Great Recession on Family Struc-

98

ture and Fertility.” The ANNALS of the American Academy of
Political and Social Science 650: 214–31.
Chiacchio, Francesco, Georgios Petropoulos, and David Pichler.
2018. “The Impact of Industrial Robots on EU Employment
and Wages: A Local Labour Market Approach.” Bruegel
Working Paper 02, Bruegel, Brussels.
Claessens, Stijn, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, Deniz Igan, and Luc
Laeven. 2010. “Cross-Country Experiences and Policy Implications from the Global Financial Crisis.” Economic Policy
April: 267–93.
Clark, Ximena, Timothy J. Hatton, and Jeffrey G. Williamson.
2007. “Explaining U.S. Immigration, 1971–98.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 89 (2): 359–73.
Congressional Budget Office (CBO). 2014. “Revisions to CBO’s
Projection of Potential Output since 2007.” https://www.cbo.
gov/publication/45150.
Elsby, Michael W.L., Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin. 2013.
“Unemployment Dynamics in the OECD.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (2): 530–48.
Enrich, David. 2010. “EU Banks Survive Stress Test.” The Wall
Street Journal, July 24. http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001
424052748703294904575384940544522582.html.
Espenshade, Thomas J. 1994. “Can Immigration Slow US
Population Aging?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management
13 (4): 759–68.
Fernald, John G. 2015. “Productivity and Potential Output
before, during, and after the Great Recession.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014 29 (1): 1–51.
Fernandes, Marcelo, Deniz Igan, and Marcelo Pinheiro. 2015.
“March Madness in Wall Street: (What) Does the Market
Learn from Stress Tests?” IMF Working Paper 15/271, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Frey, Carl Benedikt, and Michael A. Osborne. 2017. “The Future of
Employment: How Susceptible Are Jobs to Computerisation?”
Technological Forecasting and Social Change 114 (C): 254–80.
Furman, Jason. 2018. “The Fiscal Response to the Great
Recession: Steps Taken, Paths Rejected, and Lessons for Next
Time.” Brookings Institution.
Gagnon, Joseph E. 2016. “Quantitative Easing: An Underappreciated Success.” Peterson Institute of International Economics
Policy Brief 16–4, Peterson Institute of International Economics, Washington, DC.
Geithner, Timothy F. 2014. Stress Test: Reflections on Financial
Crises. New York, NY: Broadway Books.
Gertler, Mark, and Simon Gilchrist. 2018. “What Happened:
Financial Factors in the Great Recession.” NBER Working
Paper 24746, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Giannone, Domenico, Michele Lenza, and Lucrezia Reichlin.
2011. “Market Freedom and the Global Recession.” IMF
Economic Review 59 (1): 111–35.
Goos, Maarten, and Alan Manning. 2007. “Lousy and Lovely
Jobs: The Rising Polarization of Work in Britain.” The Review
of Economics and Statistics 89 (1): 118–133.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 2

THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN

———, and Anna Salomons. 2014. “Explaining Job Polarization: Routine-Biased Technological Change and Offshoring.”
American Economic Review 104 (8): 2509–26.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Maurice Obstfeld. 2012. “Stories
of the Twentieth Century for the Twenty-First.” American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (1): 226–65.
Goyal, Rishi, Petya Koeva Brooks, Mahmood Pradhan, Thierry
Tressel, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, Ross Leckow, Ceyla Pazarbasioglu, and an IMF Staff Team. 2013. “A Banking Union for
the Euro Area.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 13/01, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Graetz, Georg, and Guy Michaels. Forthcoming. “Robots at
Work.” Review of Economics and Statistics.
Hall, Robert E. 2014. “Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the US
Economy from the Financial Crisis.” NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 29: 71–128.
Hatton, Timothy J., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2002. “What
Fundamentals Drive World Migration?” NBER Working Paper
9159, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Hoem, Jan M. 2008. “The Impact of Public Policies on European Fertility.” Demographic Research (19): 249–60.
Homar, Timotej, and Sweder J. G. van Wijnbergen. 2015. “On
Zombie Banks and Recessions after Systemic Banking Crises:
Government Intervention Matters.” CEPR Discussion Paper
DP10963, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.
International Federation of Robotics (IFR). 2017. “World
Robotics 2017 Industrial Robots.” https://ifr.org.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2009. “The State of
Public Finances: Outlook and Medium-Term Policies after
the 2008 Crisis.” Fiscal Affairs Department publication,
Washington, DC.
———. 2012. “Euro Area Policies: 2012 Article IV Consultation.” IMF Country Report 12/181, Washington, DC.
———. 2013a. “Euro Area Policies: 2013 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report.” IMF Country Report 13/231, Washington, DC.
———. 2013b. “Greece: Ex Post Evaluation of Exceptional
Access under the 2010 Stand-By Arrangement.” IMF Country Report 13/156, Washington, DC.
———. 2013c. “Reassessing the Role and Modalities of Fiscal
Policy in Advanced Economies.” IMF Policy Paper, Washington, DC.
———. 2014. “IMF Multilateral Policy Issues Report.” IMF
Spillover Report, Washington, DC.
———. 2015. “Crisis Program Review.” Strategy, Policy and
Review Department, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2016.
“Sovereigns versus Banks: Credit, Crises, and Consequences.”
Journal of the European Economic Association 14 (1): 45–79.
Kahanec, Martin, and Martin Guzi. 2017. “How Immigrants
Helped EU Labor Markets to Adjust during the Great Recession.” International Journal of Manpower 38 (7): 996–1015.

Kalwij, Adriaan. 2010. “The Impact of Family Policy Expenditure
on Fertility in Western Europe.” Demography 47 (2): 503–519.
Kozlowski, Julian, Laura Veldkamp, and Venky Venkateswaran.
2017. “The Tail That Wags the Economy: Beliefs and Persistent Stagnation.” NBER Working Paper 21719, National
Bureau of Economic Research. Cambridge, MA.
Laeven, Luc, and Fabián Valencia. 2013. “Systemic Banking
Crises Database.” IMF Economic Review 61 (2): 225–70.
Lagarde, Christine. 2014. “The Challenge Facing the Global
Economy: New Momentum to Overcome a New Mediocre.”
Speech at Georgetown University School of Foreign Service,
Washington, DC, October 2.
———. 2016. “Decisive Action to Secure Durable Growth.”
Lecture at an event hosted by Bundesbank and Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany, April 5.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2010. “The
Cross-Country Incidence of the Global Crisis.” IMF Working Paper 10/171, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
———. 2014. “Global Imbalances and External Adjustment
after the Crisis.” IMF Working Paper 14/151, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
———. 2017. “International Financial Integration in the Aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis.” IMF Working Paper
17/115, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Lee, Jaewoo, Jonathan D. Ostry, Alessandro Prati, Luca A. Ricci,
and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2008. “Exchange Rate Assessments: CGER Methodologies, IMF Occasional Paper 261,
International Monetary Fund.” Washington, DC.
Lewis, Michael. 2010. The Big Short: Inside the Doomsday
Machine. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.
Lipton, David. 2018. “Trust and the Future of Multilateralism.”
IMF Blog.
Lowenstein, Roger. 2010. The End of Wall Street. New York, NY:
The Penguin Press.
Mantega, Guido. 2010. International Monetary and Financial
Committee, Statement by Guido Mantega, Minister of
Finance, Ministerio da Fazenda, Brazil, October 9.
Mitman, Kurt. 2016. “Macroeconomic Effects of Bankruptcy
and Foreclosure Policies.” American Economic Review 106 (8):
2219–55.
Neels, Karel. 2010. “Temporal Variation in Unemployment
Rates and Their Association with Tempo and Quantum of
Fertility: Some Evidence for Belgium, France, and the Netherlands.” Paper prepared for the session titled “Low Fertility
and Its Association with Macroeconomic Trends” of the
Annual Meeting of the Population Association of America.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2009. “Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis: Products of Common Causes.”
Proceedings, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, October
2009.
Ong, Li Lian, and Ceyla Pazarbasioglu. 2013. “Credibility and
Crisis Stress Testing.” IMF Working Paper 13/178, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

99

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). 2009. International Migration Outlook.
Paulson, Jr., Henry H. 2013. On the Brink: Inside the Race to
Stop the Collapse of the Global Financial System. New York,
NY: Business Plus.
Perri, Fabrizio, and Vincenzo Quadrini. 2018. “International
Recessions.” American Economic Review 108 (4–5): 935–84.
Pritchett, Lant, and Lawrence H. Summers. 2013. “Asia-Phoria
Meet Regression to the Mean.” Proceedings, Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco (November): 1–35.
Rajan, Raghuram G. 2010. Fault Lines: How Hidden Fractures
Still Threaten the Global Economy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
———. 2014. “Competitive Monetary Easing: Is It Yesterday
Once More?” Remarks at the Brookings Institution, Washington, DC, April 10.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2018. “Phillips
Lecture—Why Some Times Are Different: Macroeconomic
Policy and the Aftermath of Financial Crises.” Economica 85:
1–40.
Schanzenbach, Diane, Ryan Nunn, Lauren Bauer, and Audrey
Breitwieser. 2017. “The Closing of the Jobs Gap: A Decade
of Recession Recovery.” Brookings Institution, The Hamilton
Project, Washington, DC.
Schwartz, Carl, and Nicholas Tan. 2016. “The Australian
Government Guarantee Scheme: 2008–15.” Bulletin – March
Quarter, Reserve Bank of Australia.
Shah, Neil. 2010. “Wait-and-See after Europe Stress Test.”
The Wall Street Journal, July 26. http://blogs.wsj.com/
marketbeat/2010/07/26/wait-and-see-aftereurope-stress-test/.
Sobotka, Tomáš, Vegard Skirbekk, and Dimiter Philipov. 2011.
“Economic Recession and Fertility in the Developed World.”
Population and Development Review 37 (2): 267–306.
Solt, Frederick. 2016. “The Standardized World Income Inequality Database.” Social Science Quarterly 97 (5): 1267–281.

100

Sorkin, Andrew Ross. 2009. Too Big to Fail: The Inside Story of
How Wall Street and Washington Fought to Save the Financial
System—and Themselves. New York, NY: Viking Penguin.
Spargoli, Fabrizio. 2012. “Bank Recapitalization and the
Information Value of a Stress Test in a Crisis.” Manuscript,
Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
Summers, Lawrence H. 2016. “The Age of Secular Stagnation:
What It Is and What to Do about It.” Foreign Affairs, March/
April.
Sun, Yangfang, and Hui Tong. 2015. “How Does Postcrisis
Bank Capital Adequacy Affect Firm Investment?” IMF
Working Paper 15/145, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Thévenon, Olivier. 2011. “Family Policies in OECD Countries:
A Comparative Analysis.” Population and Development Review
37 (1): 57–87.
Thomsen, Poul. 2017. “The Euro Zone: What’s Next.” Speech
at the Financial Times Investment Management Summit,
London, September 28.
Timmer, Marcel. P., Erik Dietzenbacher, Bart Los, Robert
Stehrer, and Gaaitzen J. de Vries. 2015. “An Illustrated User
Guide to the World Input-Output Database: The Case of
Global Automotive Production.” Review of International
Economics 23 (3): 575–605.
Toloui, Ramin. 2018. “Global Financial Crisis: Origins and
Causes.” Lectures Series on Navigating Financial Crises
in the Modern Global Economy, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA.
Tsangarides, Charalambos. 2012. “Crisis and Recovery: Role of
the Exchange Rate Regime in Emerging Market Economies.”
Journal of Macroeconomics 34: 470–88.
Zhou, Xiaochuan. 2010. International Monetary and Financial
Committee, Statement by Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the
People’s Bank of China and Governor of the IMF for China,
October 9.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER

3

CHALLENGES FOR MONETARY POLICY IN EMERGING MARKETS AS
GLOBAL FINANCIAL CONDITIONS NORMALIZE

Inflation in emerging market and developing economies
since the mid-2000s has, on average, been low and stable.
This chapter investigates whether these recent gains in
inflation performance are sustainable as global financial conditions normalize. The findings are as follows:
first, despite the overall stability, sizable heterogeneity in
inflation performance and in variability of longer-term
inflation expectations remains among emerging markets.
Second, changes in longer-term inflation expectations are
the main determinant of inflation, while external conditions play a more limited role, suggesting that domestic,
not global, factors are the main contributor to the recent
gains in inflation performance. Third, further improvements in the extent of anchoring of inflation expectations
can significantly improve economic resilience to adverse
external shocks in emerging markets. Anchoring reduces
inflation persistence and limits the pass-through of currency depreciations to domestic prices, allowing monetary
policy to focus more on smoothing fluctuations in output.

Introduction
Inflation in emerging market and developing
economies (hereafter, emerging markets) has, on
average, been remarkably low and stable in recent years
(Figure 3.1).1 Following large commodity price swings,
inflation in most emerging markets has been quick
to stabilize, and the short-lived effects of inflationary
shocks have, in turn, allowed central banks in these
countries to cut interest rates to fight off recessions.
As monetary policy gradually normalizes in
advanced economies, the ability of emerging markets to fend off inflationary pressures is being tested
The authors of this chapter are Rudolfs Bems (lead), Francesca
Caselli, Francesco Grigoli, Bertrand Gruss, and Weicheng Lian,
with contributions from Michal Andrle, Yan Carrière-Swallow,
and Juan Yépez, and support from Ava Yeabin Hong, Jungjin Lee,
Cynthia Nyakeri, and Jilun Xing. Comments from Rafael Portillo are
gratefully acknowledged.
1The analysis of this chapter is largely based on 19 emerging markets:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Colombia, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Romania,
Russia, South Africa, Thailand, and Turkey. For details on the sample
selection, see Online Annex 3.1. All annexes are available online at
www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO.

again.2 This chapter examines whether the recent
gains in inflation performance—quick stabilization
after inflationary shocks—are sustainable, or represent
an artifact of (potentially temporary) global factors
that have put downward pressure on inflation. The
answer is crucial as emerging markets craft their monetary policies to navigate the future shift in global
financial conditions.
Proponents on both sides of the question can find
evidence for their positions (Figure 3.2). The optimists
can point to substantial supportive changes in institutional and policy frameworks (Rogoff 2004; Chapter 4 of the September 2005 World Economic Outlook
[WEO]; Végh and Vuletin 2014; Chapter 2 of the
April 2016 WEO). For example, after the Asian crisis
of the late 1990s, which illustrated anew some limitations of pegged exchange rate regimes, central banks
in many emerging markets adopted inflation targeting.
Furthermore, as noted, their price stability endured
despite sharp swings in commodity prices, the global
financial crisis, and periods of strong and sustained US
dollar appreciation. The policy changes, combined with
real-world success, indicate that the gains in inflation
performance are well rooted.
Pessimists can argue that China’s integration into
world trade and the broader globalization of commerce created a disinflationary environment benefiting
emerging markets (Carney 2017; Auer, Levchenko,
and Sauré forthcoming; Chapter 2 of the May 2018
Regional Economic Outlook: Asia and Pacific). They
may further note that the period following the global
financial crisis was characterized by historically benign
external financial conditions—manifested in low US
government bond yields and compressed spreads in
emerging markets—that limited the number of crisis
events and accompanying inflation surges in emerging
markets (Chapter 2 of the April 2016 WEO).
To shed more light on these issues, this chapter
first examines the above competing claims: Was the
2As advanced economies endeavor to raise interest rates from
abnormal lows, currencies in emerging markets will tend to depreciate as global portfolio investments react to diminished yield differentials. The depreciation will be passed on to domestic prices.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

101

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 3.1. Headline Consumer Price Index Inﬂation

Figure 3.2. Institutional and Policy Changes, Global Shocks,
and Financial Conditions

Following a period of disinﬂation during the 1990s and early 2000s, inﬂation in
emerging markets has remained low and stable since the mid-2000s.

The decline and subsequent stability of inﬂation in emerging markets coincided
with substantial improvements in institutional and policy frameworks and endured
despite sharp swings in commodity prices and other large global shocks. Yet, the
period was also characterized by historically benign external ﬁnancial conditions.

(Percent)

35
30
25

40

80 1. Inﬂation Targeting and Openness in Emerging Markets
(Percent)

EMs: median
EMs: weighted average
AEs: weighted average

Disinﬂation period

60

20

35

40

15
10

0
1995

5
0

2000

04

180 2. Global Shocks
(Index)

–5
1995

2000

04

10

15

18

Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging markets. See Online Annex 3.1
for data sources and country coverage. Weighted average is constructed using
weights of nominal GDP, expressed in US dollar terms, for 2010–12. The vertical
dashed line distinguishes the disinﬂation period from the rest of the sample.

3Chapter 3 of the April 2006 WEO draws similar conclusions
from an analysis of the role of global factors in the disinflation
episode of the 1990s and early 2000s. Focusing on advanced economies, Ihrig and others (2010) find little support for an increasing
role of global factors in the inflation process, although others (see
Borio and Filardo 2007) argue that the role of global factors has
increased since the 1990s.

102

10

25

15

500

Exchange value of US dollar
Commodity price index (right scale)

160

400

140

300

120

200

100

100

80
1995

recent benign inflation behavior widespread among
emerging markets? What was driving inflation during
this episode? And have the gains in inflation been well
rooted through better domestic policies, or can they be
expected to wane as global conditions shift?
Analysis of these initial questions finds that, first, the
improved inflation performance since the mid-2000s
was indeed broad based. However, the gains have not
been uniform, as some emerging markets continue to
find it challenging to keep inflation low. Second, it
concludes that longer-term inflation expectations have
been the main factor determining inflation, compared
with the considerably smaller role of external conditions. This finding suggests that domestic, not global,
factors were the main contributor to the recent gains
in inflation performance.3

30

Inﬂation targeters
Financial openness
Trade openness (right scale)

20

2000

04

10

15

18

0

1,200 3. 10-Year Treasury Note Yield and EMBIG Spreads
(Basis points)
10-Year Treasury note yield
1,000
EMBIG spreads: median
EMBIG spreads: interquartile range
800
600
400
200
0
1995

2000

04

10

15

18

Sources: Haver Analytics; JPMorgan Emerging Market Bond Index; Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti (2018); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: EMBIG = emerging market bond index global. See Online Annex 3.1 for data
sources and country coverage. Inﬂation targeters are expressed as percent of
countries in the sample. Trade openness is deﬁned as imports in percent of GDP
(ﬁve-year moving average). Financial openness is deﬁned as the sum of foreign
direct investment and portfolio equity liabilities in percent of GDP (ﬁve-year
moving average). Exchange value of US dollar is the nominal broad trade-weighted
exchange value of the US dollar (Jan-95=100). The commodity price index is
based on prices in US dollars of a broad set of commodities (Jan-95=100). EMBIG
spreads are spreads between sovereign bonds in emerging markets and
comparable US Treasury bonds. The vertical dashed line distinguishes the
disinﬂation period from the rest of the sample.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize

Given the importance of changes in inflation expectations in driving inflation in emerging markets, the
second part of the chapter zooms in on the behavior of
inflation expectations. It measures and summarizes the
extent of anchoring of longer-term inflation expectations in emerging markets and studies its implications
for inflation performance and the conduct of monetary
policy. More specifically, the chapter addresses the
following questions:
•• How has the extent of anchoring of inflation
expectations evolved in recent decades? How much
heterogeneity in the extent of anchoring is there
among emerging markets, and how does it compare
with conditions in advanced economies?
•• What are the implications of the extent of anchoring
of inflation expectations for monetary policy cyclicality and macroeconomic resilience when facing
adverse external shocks?
In examining those questions, the chapter reaches
the following conclusions:
•• The anchoring of inflation expectations has
improved significantly over the past two decades,
with the bulk of the gains taking place in the 2000s.
Nonetheless, there is considerable heterogeneity in
the extent of anchoring across emerging markets,
as longer-term inflation expectations in several countries remain relatively volatile.
•• Better-anchored inflation expectations reduce inflation persistence and limit the pass-through of currency depreciations to domestic prices. Such stability
allows monetary policy to focus more on smoothing
output fluctuations and improving resilience to
adverse external shocks.
The chapter concludes that, amid monetary policy
normalization in advanced economies, it is important for
policymakers in emerging markets to consolidate and, in
some cases, further improve the extent of anchoring of
inflation expectations. How can the volatility of domestic inflation expectations be reduced? The empirical
findings from the literature, confirmed by the evidence
reported in this chapter, link the extent of anchoring to
the performance of domestic fiscal and monetary policy
frameworks. Fiscal sustainability is a necessary precondition for a credible nominal anchor. Similarly, a reduction
in the variability of longer-term inflation expectations
cannot be achieved without a credible and independent
central bank that communicates its intentions in a
transparent and timely manner. These recommenda-

tions remain relevant also for emerging markets with
better-anchored expectations, as their commitment to
inflation targets will likely be tested by the gradual monetary policy normalization in advanced economies.

Extent of Improvements in Inflation Outcomes
How broad based are the gains in inflation performance? To answer this question, this section first examines headline consumer price inflation statistics, which
are available for a comprehensive set of 90 emerging
market and developing economies, and then zooms in
on a sample of 19 emerging markets for which more
detailed inflation data are available.4 Box 3.1 shows
that the 19 sample countries, which constitute 80 percent of the GDP of all emerging market and developing economies, are broadly representative in terms of
inflation trends of the comprehensive set of emerging
market and developing economies.5
Headline consumer prices in the wider group of
emerging market and developing economies, split into
three broad geographical areas—Asia, Latin America,
and the combination of Europe, the Middle East, and
Africa—all exhibit the same pattern of convergence to
lower inflation rates (Figure 3.3, panel 1). The sizable
and persistent differences in inflation rates among
these regions during the 1990s and early 2000s were
gone by the mid-2000s. In addition, the dispersion of
inflation rates across emerging market and developing
economies—as measured by the distance between the
10th and 90th percentiles of the distribution—had
declined substantially by the mid-2000s and has
remained relatively stable since then.
The share of emerging market and developing economies with inflation rates exceeding 10 percent declined
4Country coverage, data sources, and definitions of variables are
reported in Online Annex 3.1.
5The sample includes relatively large emerging markets but, with
regard to other basic macroeconomic characteristics (income per
capita, GDP growth rates, the level of financial development, and
trade openness), the sample economies are comparable to the rest of
emerging market and developing economies. One notable difference
is that the median degree of exchange rate flexibility among the
sample economies is larger than among all emerging market and
developing economies. The more limited exchange rate flexibility in
the broader set of emerging market and developing economies can
affect inflation through channels that are less prevalent in the sample
economies (see Box 3.1). However, the broader concept of inflation
expectations anchoring—as studied in this chapter—is equally relevant in flexible, managed, or fixed exchange rate regimes. See Adrian,
Laxton, and Obstfeld (2018) for a discussion of the challenges in
managing inflation expectations under different monetary regimes.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

103

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 3.3. Regional Differences and Dispersion in Headline
Consumer Price Index Inﬂation in Emerging Market and
Developing Economies

Figure 3.4. Other Measures of Price Inﬂation in Emerging
Markets
(Percent)

(Percent)

The gains in inﬂation performance among emerging market and developing
economies were broad based. But 15 percent of these economies still registered
double-digit inﬂation rates over 2004–18.

Alternative price measures for emerging markets also indicate a sizable decline in
inﬂation during the 1990s and early 2000s and relative price stability since the
mid-2000s.
30

1. Weighted Average Inﬂation, by Region
Asia
Latin America
Europe, Middle East, and Africa
All EMDEs: interdecile range

35
25

Core consumer price index
Producer price index
GDP deﬂator

25
20

15
15

5
10

–5
1995
60

2000

05

10

15

17

2. Share of Countries with Double-Digit Inﬂation

5
0

50
–5
1995

40
30

2000

05

10

15

17

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. Lines denote
medians across sample emerging markets of each indicator.

20
10
0
1995

2000

05

10

15

17

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies. See Online Annex 3.1
for data sources and country coverage.

dramatically from the mid-1990s until the early 2000s
and stayed relatively stable thereafter (Figure 3.3, panel
2). Nonetheless, the gains in inflation behavior are not
uniform—15 percent of emerging market and developing economies have had a headline inflation rate of
10 percent or more, on average, from 2004 to the first
quarter of 2018. Several other economies exhibited
sustained surges of inflation to double-digit rates.
Turning to other measures of price inflation, the
inflation rate for so-called core consumer prices, which
exclude food and energy items with more volatile
prices, also declined until the mid-2000s and has
remained low and stable since then (Figure 3.4).6 The
6For these more detailed inflation statistics, as well as the econometric analysis that follows, the chapter focuses on the narrower
sample of 19 emerging markets, defined in Online Annex 3.1.

104

inflation rate of producer prices fell drastically during
the 1990s and has remained at relatively low levels ever
since. Finally, the same pattern is exhibited by GDP
deflators, which encompass the prices of all domestically produced final goods and services.
Inflation variability has been stable or declining in
emerging markets since 2004 (Figure 3.5). The decline
in the variability of inflation rates is not driven by
exchange rate behavior, as there is no clear evidence
of a decline in the variability of exchange rate movements since the late 1990s.7 Inflation persistence also
declined gradually during the sample period.8 As with
inflation rates—which are higher in emerging markets
than in advanced economies—two factors suggest that
emerging markets could be expected to exhibit a greater
degree of inflation volatility and persistence. First, a
higher share of consumption in emerging markets is
devoted to food and other commodities, whose prices
7See Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2017) for a discussion of
changes in de facto exchange rate volatility.
8Inflation persistence is defined as the tendency for price shocks to
elevate inflation above its long-term level for a prolonged period (see
Online Annex 3.1 for details).

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize

tend to be more volatile. And, especially regarding persistence, monetary policy institutions and frameworks
in emerging markets could be less developed and thus
less effective.9 So, it is a notable commentary on the
progress made in strengthening monetary policy
frameworks in emerging markets that, since 2004, the
volatility of inflation for a large share (but not all) of
the country sample has been comparable to that in
advanced economies. The persistence of inflation has
also been reduced, even though it remains somewhat
above the level in advanced economies.
In sum, inflation performance in emerging markets has markedly improved since the mid-2000s.
The improvement is not, however, uniform across the
country sample, and inflation is still generally more
volatile and persistent than in advanced economies.

Figure 3.5. Inﬂation Dynamics
(Percent)

The variability and persistence of consumer price inﬂation has declined
signiﬁcantly in emerging markets, remaining relatively low since the mid-2000s.
1. Headline Consumer Price Index Inﬂation

40

Volatility

10

30

8

25
20

6

15

4

10

2

5
0
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16

Determinants of Inflation in Emerging Markets

2. Core Consumer Price Index Inﬂation

What has been driving inflation in emerging markets during the period of stable and low inflation from
2004 to the first quarter of 2018? Among other inflation determinants, this section assesses the role played
by two competing forces—external price pressures and
changes in longer-term inflation expectations—and
gauges the overall contributions from factors of global
and domestic origin.10
The analysis decomposes inflation into contributions
from conventional determinants of inflation—the degree
of economic slack, inflation expectations, and external
factors—and consists of two stages.11 The first stage
estimates a Phillips curve.12 The specification includes
domestic and foreign output gaps, three-year-ahead
inflation forecasts, and a measure of external price developments as explanatory factors, and allows for inflation
persistence and country fixed effects. The baseline
specification is estimated for a panel of sample emerging

35

9See Mishkin (2007) for a discussion of how better monetary
policy can contribute to a decline in inflation persistence.
10In line with the existing literature, longer-term inflation expectations are proxied by surveys covering professional forecasters. Some
studies have documented significant differences between forecasts
of households and firms and those of professional analysts (see, for
instance, Mankiw, Reis, and Wolfers 2004); unfortunately, surveys
covering households and firms are rarely available.
11See Online Annexes 3.1 and 3.2 for details.
12Estimates are from a hybrid variant of a standard New Keynesian Phillips curve framework. See Galí and Gertler (1999) and
Galí, Gertler, and Lopez-Salido (2001, 2003) for the theoretical
underpinnings. To account for the role of global factors, the analysis
follows Borio and Filardo (2007); Ihrig and others (2010); and Auer,
Levchenko, and Sauré (forthcoming).

12

Persistence

35

Volatility

1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16

Persistence

0

10

30

8

25
20

6

15

4

10

2

5
0
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16

1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16

0

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. The volatility is
computed as the standard deviation of detrended (Hodrick-Prescott) inﬂation.
Persistence denotes the standard deviation of the permanent component of
inﬂation based on Stock and Watson (2007). The horizontal line in each box
represents the median across countries; the upper and lower edges of each box
show the top and bottom quartiles; and the vertical lines denote the range
between the top and bottom deciles. The dots denote the average for advanced
economies. X-axis labels indicate the start of three-year windows.

markets using core inflation and quarterly data from the
first quarter of 2004 to the first quarter of 2018.13 Estimated parameters are broadly consistent with findings in
the literature (Figure 3.6).
The second stage of the analysis explores the role
of explanatory factors in determining actual inflation
during 2004–18. The exercise is constructed in terms
13The chapter’s main findings are unchanged for specifications
using headline consumer price inflation (Online Annex 3.2). The
results are robust to excluding the period of the global financial crisis
or focusing the analysis on the postcrisis period.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

105

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 3.6. Coefﬁcient Estimates from the Baseline Phillips
Curve Speciﬁcation

Figure 3.7. Contributions to Deviation of Core Inﬂation from
Target

Inﬂation expectations, domestic output gaps, and external price pressure
signiﬁcantly inﬂuence consumer price inﬂation in emerging markets.

Changes in longer-term inﬂation expectations have been the key driver of the level
and variability of inﬂation in emerging markets, although there is substantial
cross-country heterogeneity.

(Percentage points)

(Percentage points, unless noted otherwise)

0.05

1.0

Output gap
External price pressure

Foreign output gap
Expected inﬂation

Country ﬁxed effect
Residual

0.04

0.8

1.5 1. Average Contribution, by Subperiod
0.6

0.03

0.4

0.02

0.2

0.01

1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.5

0.00

0.0

Inﬂation
expectations

Past
inﬂation

Output gap

Foreign External price
output gap
pressure
(right scale)

–0.01

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. The dots
denote the estimated coefﬁcient from a hybrid Phillips curve model (see Online
Annex 3.2) and the vertical lines denote the 90 percent conﬁdence interval.

2004:Q1–08:Q2

08:Q3–09:Q4

10:Q1–14:Q2

14:Q3–18:Q1

3 2. Average Contribution, by Country
2
1
0
–1

14When a country is not an inflation targeter, its implicit
target is defined as the moving average of 10-year-ahead inflation
expectations.
15The decomposition of inflation dynamics is conducted in a
manner similar to that in Yellen (2015) and Chapter 3 of the October 2016 WEO, taking into account the estimated persistence of the
inflation process. See Online Annex 3.2 for details.

106

ROU

RUS

THA

TUR

ZAF

ROU

RUS

THA

TUR

ZAF

PHL

POL

PER

MEX

MYS

IND

IDN

COL

HUN

CHN

CHL

BRA

80
60
40

POL

PHL

PER

MEX

MYS

IND

IDN

HUN

0

COL

20
CHN

The results indicate that changes in longer-term
inflation expectations have been the key driver of
the level of inflation in emerging markets, with an
overall positive contribution to inflation in each of
the four indicative subperiods explored (Figure 3.7,
panel 1). That is, inflation expectations for the sample

100

3. Contribution to Inﬂation Variability, by Country
(Percent)

CHL

Contributions to Inflation

–3

BRA

of deviations in inflation from its target values.14 The
contribution of each explanatory factor is computed
in terms of (1) average contributions to inflation
levels, and (2) contributions to inflation variability at
quarterly frequency, in the spirit of a variance decomposition exercise.15

BGR

–2

BGR

–0.2

–1.0

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. The bars in
panel 1 (panel 2) represent the simple average contribution of each factor
averaged across countries (periods). The diamonds in panel 1 represent the overall
deviation in inﬂation. Bars for contributions to inﬂation variability in panel 3 show
the simple average of the absolute values of country-speciﬁc contributions across
periods, expressed as percent of the overall deviation of core inﬂation from target.
Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize

emerging markets, on average, exceeded the inflation
target.16 In comparison, external prices exerted a
deflationary influence, but the magnitude of this effect
(−0.05 percentage point annually, on average, over
the sample period) was considerably smaller than that
of longer-term inflation expectations (0.5 percentage
point). The deflationary pressure from external prices
was most pronounced during the boom that preceded
the global financial crisis.
The overall deviation of inflation from the target
declined gradually during 2004–14, by 0.7 percentage
point.17 This trend is partly explained by output gaps
(domestic and foreign), which stimulated inflation
during the boom of 2004–07 and depressed it during
the bust of 2008–09, and partly by the remaining residual.
Examining the same contributions at the country
level reveals that, although changes in longer-term
inflation expectations are the main overall contributor
to the deviations of actual inflation from target, there
is noticeable cross-country heterogeneity (Figure 3.7,
panel 2). The average inflationary impact of expectations is sizable for only half of the economies in the
sample. In contrast, external price developments have
exerted downward pressure on domestic prices for
three-fourths of the economies in the sample, even
though the magnitude of this contribution is small.
The impact of cyclical factors is, by construction, limited when averaged over 2004–18.
Analysis of contributions to the variability of
inflation shows that the model, on average, explains
55 percent of the deviations of inflation from target
(Figure 3.7, panel 3). The results confirm the importance of fluctuations in longer-term inflation expectations around the inflation target. Inflation expectations
are the largest contributing explanatory factor for
four-fifths of the sample countries, explaining, on average, 20 percent of the variation in inflation. Similar to
the evidence in Figure 3.7, panel 2, there is substantial
heterogeneity across countries, with the share attributable to inflation expectations ranging from 2 percent
to 35 percent. The results also confirm that external
price movements played a more limited role in the
variability in inflation rates, on average explaining
8 percent of inflation deviations. The contribution of
16This could reflect the public’s doubts about the central bank’s
commitment to the inflation target, or concerns about fiscal sustainability, which may imply higher inflation in the future.
17This decline is consistent with the small downward trend in core
consumer price inflation shown in Figure 3.4.

the foreign output gap is negligible in all decomposition results.18

Role of Domestic and Global Factors
The remaining task for the analysis is to assess
domestic and global contributions to inflation in
emerging markets. The two capture an important
distinction in that only domestic factors can be influenced by policies in emerging markets, making them
potentially sustainable. In contrast, foreign factors,
even when deflationary, are more temporary in nature
and could dissipate or reverse.
To gauge the contribution of global factors to inflation deviations from target, the analysis reinterprets
results from the baseline contributions exercise in panel
3 of Figure 3.7. Fluctuations in inflation expectations
and domestic output gaps are considered domestic factors, whereas external price pressure and foreign output
gaps are interpreted as global factors.19,20 Applying this
definition of global factors, the contribution results for
inflation variability suggest that inflation deviations
from target during 2004–18 were largely determined
by domestic factors, with foreign factors explaining
5–15 percent of inflation variability.
18The

analysis in this section is subject to several limitations. First,
the Phillips curve estimates can be affected by endogeneity issues,
although the robustness exercises in Online Annex 3.2 suggest that the
economic magnitude of the potential biases are relatively small. Second, the decomposition results are subject to sizable uncertainty given
that 45 percent of the variability in inflation remains unexplained.
19The labeling of contributions as domestic and global factors
warrants a cautionary note. On one hand, inflation expectations
can be affected by both domestic and global factors, leading to an
underestimation of the contribution of global factors. However,
the baseline specification directly controls for foreign variables.
Moreover, the results, when the inflation expectations variable is
purged of external factors (by replacing it with the residual from a
regression of inflation expectations on external price pressure, foreign
output gap, and country and time fixed effects), are similar (Online
Annex 3.2), indicating that inflation expectations are mostly driven
by domestic factors. That said, foreign shocks that have an impact
on the domestic output gap, but are not captured by changes in
the foreign output gap and the external price pressure variable, can
also lead to a downward bias in the estimated contribution of global
factors. On the other hand, some of the fluctuations in the exchange
rate embedded in the external price pressure variable can be due to
domestic factors, potentially biasing the estimated contribution of
foreign factors upward.
20Online Annex 3.2 reports results from alternative model specifications that include a broader set of foreign factors (for example, global value chain participation, external price pressure from
China). Also examined is an alternative decomposition exercise that
decomposes inflation levels rather than deviations from target values.
Baseline results concerning domestic versus global contributions are
shown to be robust to all alternative specifications.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

107

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 3.8. Time Fixed Effects and Common Drivers, by
Subperiod
(Percentage points)

Apart from the commodity-induced inﬂation surge during 2008, common factors
played a limited role as drivers of inﬂation dynamics in emerging markets over
2004–18.

0.5
Residuals

Predicted values

Time ﬁxed effects

0.4
0.3
0.2

Anchoring of Inflation Expectations

0.1

How anchored are expectations in emerging markets? After discussing how to define and measure the
degree of anchoring, this section documents the evolution of anchoring over time, the extent of its variation
across the sample economies, and the influence of
policy frameworks on the extent of anchoring.

0.0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3

provides a negligible average contribution to inflation
during the post–global financial crisis period. These
findings corroborate the earlier findings on the comparatively limited average impact of global factors in
driving inflation in emerging markets.
Overall, the results of this section point to the centrality of fluctuations in longer-term inflation expectations in driving inflation in emerging countries, which
are interpreted to be of domestic origin. Motivated by
these findings, the rest of the chapter zooms in on the
behavior of inflation expectations.

2004:Q1–08:Q2

08:Q3–09:Q4

10:Q1–14:Q2

14:Q3–18:Q1

Measuring Anchoring

Could the decrease in the average decomposition
residual during 2004–14 (Figure 3.7, panel 1) signify a
common source of downward pressure on inflation? To
address this question, the analysis estimates a common
driver of inflation across emerging markets that cannot
be explained by domestic factors.21 The approach is
implemented by including time fixed effects in the
model specification. Results show that the common
component (that is, the time fixed effects) captures
the commodity-induced inflation surge during 2008
but, for other sample subperiods, its contribution to
inflation deviations from target is small in economic
terms (the black line in Figure 3.8). Furthermore, the
estimated time fixed effects correlate with domestic
explanatory factors. Beyond these factors, the residual

The concept of anchored inflation expectations
has no widely agreed-upon definition. The literature
has, however, developed an operational or practical
definition—it is a set of predictions about the behavior
of inflation forecasts in economies where expectations
are “anchored.” Under those circumstances, expectations for inflation over a sufficiently long horizon
should be centered around the explicit or implicit
target and hence not react to transitory fluctuations in
actual inflation or in short-term inflation expectations
(Demertzis, Marcellino, and Viegi 2012; Kumar and
others 2015). In addition, if the monetary framework is credible and inflation expectations are well
anchored, the dispersion (range of values) of individual
longer-term inflation forecasts would tend to be low
(Capistrán and Ramos-Francia 2010; Dovern, Fritsche,
and Slacalek 2012; Ehrmann 2015; Kumar and
others 2015).
Building on these operational characteristics, the
analysis uses survey-based longer-term inflation forecasts from professional forecasters to construct four
complementary metrics aimed at capturing the extent
of anchoring of inflation expectations:22

21For details of this two-stage regression specification, see notes to
Figure 3.8. See Chapter 3 of the October 2017 WEO for an earlier
application of this approach.

22Detailed definitions for each measure are provided in Online
Annex 3.3.

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. Time ﬁxed
effects are constructed as predicted values from the regression reported in
column (1) of Online Annex Table 3.2.2. Residuals are from a regression of these
time ﬁxed effects on averages of other explanatory factors included in the same
ﬁrst-stage regression and a constant. Time ﬁxed effects and predicted values are
subsequently normalized such that time ﬁxed effects in 2004–18 average to zero.

108

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize

•• A summary measure of absolute deviations in inflation forecasts from a target,
•• A summary measure of the variability of inflation
forecasts over time,
•• The dispersion of inflation forecasts across individual forecasters, and
•• The sensitivity of inflation forecasts to surprises
about current inflation.

Figure 3.9. Evolution of the Degree of Anchoring of Inﬂation
Expectations, 2000–17

In each case, a lower reading represents better
anchoring of inflation expectations. Of course, each
measure has advantages and shortcomings, including
in terms of data coverage. Nonetheless, these four measures convey a consistent picture for each country.23

1.5

1.5

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

The Extent of Anchoring in Emerging Markets
These metrics suggest that inflation expectations have
become increasingly anchored in emerging markets over
the past two decades (Figure 3.9). The improvement
in the extent of anchoring was particularly prominent
in the early 2000s; subsequent gains have been more
muted. Toward the end of the sample period, there is
evidence that the extent of anchoring has worsened in a
few countries. However, this recent trend is not consistent across the four anchoring metrics.
At the same time, the metrics point to substantial
variation in the degree of anchoring across emerging
markets (Figure 3.10). At the high end, the average
level of anchoring over 2004–17 in some emerging
markets was even higher than the average for a sample
of 11 inflation-targeting advanced economies. But
for the emerging markets in the bottom quartile (the
least anchored), the average reading for each measure
is between three and seven times larger than that for
emerging markets in the top quartile.24 On average,
anchoring in emerging markets remains substantially
weaker than in advanced economies.
The heterogeneity in the extent of anchoring is
reflected in the role of inflation expectations in determining deviations of inflation from targets (Figure 3.7,
panels 1 and 2). If the sample economies are split
into two even groups according to how well anchored
expectations were during 2004–18, the contribution of
23The rankings of economies, based on each metric of anchoring,
correlate highly across measures, with the rank correlation between
any two measures ranging from 0.56 to 0.87.
24The metrics also reveal that the position of economies in the
ranking for anchoring has changed little over time, indicating that
the extent of anchoring changes slowly (Online Annex Figure 3.3.1).

(Percent)

Inﬂation expectations in emerging markets have become increasingly anchored
over the past two decades, with most of the gains taking place prior to the
mid-2000s.

2.0 1. Deviation of Long-Term
Forecasts from Target

0.0
2000–05

06–11

12–17

1.4 3. Dispersion of LongTerm Forecasts
1.2

2. Variability of LongTerm Forecasts

2000–05

2.0

0.0
12–17

06–11

4. Sensitivity of LongTerm Forecasts to
Inﬂation Surprises

0.6

0.4

1.0
0.8

0.2

0.6
0.4
0.2
2000–05

06–11

12–17

2000–05

0.0
12–17

06–11

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. The ﬁgure
shows the evolution of the degree of anchoring of inﬂation expectations over
six-year rolling windows. The lines denote the median across countries. The
shaded areas denote interquartile ranges. The measures on the degree of
anchoring of inﬂation expectations are deﬁned in Online Annex 3.3. In all panels,
lower values denote more-anchored inﬂation expectations.

changes in longer-term inflation expectations to actual
inflation is substantially larger for the economies with
less-anchored inflation expectations (by 0.4 percentage point annually on average) than for those with
more-anchored inflation expectations.25 The contribution of other factors to actual inflation is broadly
similar across the less- and more-anchored groups.
In sum, the extent of anchoring of inflation expectations in emerging markets has improved significantly
over the past few decades, but sizable differences
25Similarly, changes in longer-term inflation expectations account
for a relatively low fraction of inflation variability in those economies with better-anchored expectations, such as Chile and Poland
(Figure 3.7, panel 3).

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

109

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 3.10. Cross-Country Heterogeneity in Degree of
Anchoring of Inﬂation Expectations, 2004–17

remain across emerging markets and relative to
advanced economies.

The extent of anchoring of inﬂation expectations varies markedly across emerging
markets and remains substantially weaker than in advanced economies on average.

Anchoring and Policy Frameworks

(Percent)

2.0 1. Deviation of Long-Term Forecasts from Target

8.37

1.5
1.0

CHL
POL
CHN
MYS
PHL
HUN
PER
BRA
MEX
COL
BGR
IDN
ZAF
IND
THA
ROU
TUR
RUS
ARG*

0.0

AEs

0.5

2.0 2. Variability of Long-Term Forecasts

5.99

1.5
1.0

CHL
MEX
PER
POL
HUN
ZAF
MYS
COL
BRA
CHN
THA
PHL
IDN
IND
TUR
BGR
ROU
RUS
ARG*

0.0

AEs

0.5

2.0 3. Dispersion of Long-Term Forecasts

4.41

1.5
1.0

AEs

0.0

CHL
POL
MEX
PER
COL
HUN
BRA
ROU
MYS
IND
PHL
THA
CHN
BGR
IDN
RUS
TUR
ARG*

0.5

0.4 4. Sensitivity of Long-Term Forecasts to Inﬂation Surprises
0.3
0.2

CHL
COL
MYS
POL
IND
THA
MEX
BRA
HUN
PER
ZAF
IDN
ROU
RUS
CHN
ARG
BGR
PHL
TUR

AEs

0.1
0.0

What explains the improvements in the anchoring
of longer-term inflation expectations across emerging
markets, as well as the still-sizable cross-country differences? A comprehensive study is beyond the scope of
this chapter, but an exploration of the data confirms
findings from the literature regarding the important
role of sound monetary and fiscal frameworks in determining inflation expectations.
The literature suggests that the extent of anchoring
is intimately related to the credibility of the monetary
strategy (Cukierman and Meltzer 1986; King 1995).26
A monetary policy plan will be credible if the public
believes the monetary authority does not have incentives to deviate from that plan or does not need to
subordinate it to other considerations, such as restoring
fiscal solvency. The formation of inflation expectations
thus lies at the heart of any concept of credibility.
Central banks may use monetary policy to pursue multiple goals, but the credibility of the policy is typically
interpreted in terms of inflation performance.
Several studies have found that adopting an inflation target and transparent public communication of
monetary policy helps anchor inflation expectations in
emerging and advanced economies alike.27 The data
analyzed here confirm the importance of inflation
targeting and transparency in the sample of emerging markets covered in this chapter (Figure 3.11,

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = average of 11 advanced inﬂation targeting economies. See Online
Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. The ﬁgures show the average
value for each anchoring measure over 2004–17. Values marked with (*) have
been truncated at 2. The measures on the degree of anchoring of inﬂation
expectations are deﬁned in Online Annex 3.3. In all panels, lower values denote
more-anchored inﬂation expectations. Data labels use International Organization
for Standardization (ISO) country codes.

110

26Cukierman

and Meltzer (1986) argue that the ability of the
monetary authority to achieve its future objectives depends on the
inflation expectations of the public, which in turn depend on the
public’s evaluation of the credibility of the monetary authority.
27Gürkaynak, Levin, and Swanson (2010) analyze the behavior of
long-term forward rates on nominal and inflation-indexed bonds in
Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States, and conclude
that announcing an explicit inflation target helps anchor long-term
inflation expectations. Levin, Natalucci, and Piger (2004) reach a
similar conclusion for a broader sample of advanced economies.
Capistrán and Ramos-Francia (2010) find that the dispersion of
inflation forecasts in emerging markets tended to fall after adopting
an inflation target, while Brito, Carrière-Swallow, and Gruss (2018)
argue that the reduction in disagreement among forecasts that
follows the adoption of inflation targeting is largely due to increased
central bank transparency. Chapter 3 of the May 2018 Regional
Economic Outlook: Western Hemisphere finds that stronger transparency frameworks and communication strategies are associated with
more-anchored inflation expectations.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize

Implications of Anchoring for Monetary Policy
Longer-term inflation expectations are a key driver of
inflation in emerging markets, and the economies vary
in the degree to which the expectations are anchored.
When longer-term expectations are not well anchored,
28The analysis on Figure 3.11 is based on the variability of inflation forecasts, but a similar picture emerges when any of the other
three anchoring metrics is used.
29See Al-Mashat and others (2018b) for a discussion of how
central bank transparency and enhanced communication can reinforce confidence in the long-term inflation target and improve the
effectiveness of the monetary policy instrument.
30Other factors are also likely to matter for longer-term anchoring;
for instance, Mishkin and Savastano (2001) point to the importance
of stringent prudential regulations and strict supervision of financial
institutions to ensure that the system is capable of withstanding
exchange rate fluctuations.
31The analysis uses asset prices to capture the market perception
about the sustainability of public debt. Importantly, these measures
incorporate not only concerns about the current level of public
debt for intertemporal fiscal solvency, but also the expected path of
future deficits.

Figure 3.11. Anchoring of Inﬂation Expectations and Policy
Frameworks, 2004–17
(Percent, unless noted otherwise)

Sound monetary and ﬁscal frameworks are associated with better-anchored
inﬂation expectations in emerging markets.
Years in IT regime

CB transparency

2.0 1. Years in IT and CB Transparency Index
Variability of long-term forecasts

panel 1).28 The cross-country variation in the degree
of anchoring is related to both the maturity of an
inflation targeting regime—more precisely, to the age
of the regime—and to the transparency of central
bank policy (as measured by Dincer and Eichengreen
2014). More broadly, central bank communication
plays a key role in anchoring expectations by improving the predictability of monetary policy (Box 3.2).29
Regardless of the specific design of the monetary
framework, sound and sustainable fiscal policy is
essential for the credibility of monetary policy (see,
for instance, Masson, Savastano, and Sharma 1997;
Mishkin 2000; and Mishkin and Savastano 2001).30
If public debt is perceived to be unsustainable, higher
inflation will be expected. The mechanism for the
expected price acceleration is the expectation of “fiscal
dominance”—an eventual monetization of the debt
or large devaluations of the currency. Some studies have indeed found an association between fiscal
institutions and credibility on one hand and inflation
performance and the anchoring of inflation expectations on the other (Combes and others 2017; Caldas
Montes and Acar 2018) or a link between expected
fiscal performance and inflation expectations (Celasun,
Gelos, and Prati 2004). In line with these studies, the
cross-country variation in the degree of anchoring in
the sample covered in this chapter is positively related
to the market perception about the sustainability of
public debt (Figure 3.11, panel 2).31

1.5
1.0

y = 0.93 – 0.05x
R 2 = 0.36 (t-stat = –2.97)

y = 0.94 – 0.04x
R 2 = 0.09 (t-stat = –1.23)

0.5
0.0
0

5
10
Years in IT and CB transparency index
EMBIG

15

CDS

1.5 2. EMBIG and CDS Spread
Variability of long-term forecasts

CHAPTER 3

1.0
y = 0.99 + 0.002x
R 2 = 0.10 (t-stat = 1.32)

0.5
y = 1.42 + 0.004x
R 2 = 0.25 (t-stat = 2.14)

0.0
–450

–400
–350
–300
–250
–200
–150
EMBIG and CDS spread (deviation from global, bps)

–100

Sources: Dicer and Eichengreen (2014); JP Morgan; Thomson Reuters
Datastream; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: bps = basis points; CB = central bank; CDS = credit default swap;
EMBIG = emerging market bond index global; IT = inﬂation targeting. See Online
Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. EMBIG spreads and CDS
spreads are the residuals from a regression on time ﬁxed effects. For the CB
transparency index, higher values indicate higher degree of transparency.
Argentina is excluded from the ﬁgures as an outlier; its inclusion would further
strengthen the depicted relationships.

they tend to rise with price shocks that depress economic activity and place central banks in a policy
dilemma. Reacting to rising inflation expectations with
tighter monetary conditions would worsen output
effects, and loosening policy to boost activity would
worsen inflation expectations. Hence, central banks in
economies with less-anchored expectations would be less
able to focus on smoothing output fluctuations.
International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

111

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

A vast literature has explored how inflation performance differs according to variations in the monetary
framework (see, for instance, Rogoff and others 2004;
Ball and Sheridan 2005; and Gonçalves and Salles
2008). The approach in this section asks, instead,
whether variations in the degree of anchoring of
inflation expectations affect inflation performance and
the trade-offs faced by monetary policy in emerging markets.32
In particular, the external shock represented by
the ongoing normalization of monetary policy in the
United States and other advanced economies may
well depress activity in emerging markets while also
triggering a temporary increase in inflation. This
section addresses the following question: Will emerging
markets with more-anchored inflation expectations be
better able to fight the incipient downturn triggered by
the external shock?
The approach takes the variation in the degree of
anchoring among emerging markets as given, or as a
characteristic that changes only slowly.33 The analysis
first adapts a conventional New Keynesian monetary
model to illustrate how the extent of anchoring may
influence the domestic economic impact of an external
shock. Second, an event analysis uses an earlier and
comparable shock—the so-called taper tantrum during
the summer of 2013—to explore differences in the
responses of key variables between emerging markets
with more- and less-anchored inflation expectations.
Finally, the analysis explores whether the ability to
conduct countercyclical monetary policy in emerging
markets is related to the extent of anchoring of inflation expectations.

Insights from a Monetary Model
A version of a New Keynesian monetary model
is used to examine how the extent of central bank
credibility can influence the impact of an external
shock on domestic inflation dynamics and on the
reaction of monetary policy. The shock considered is
akin to a sudden stop in capital flows (Calvo 1998)
32The

approach pursued in this chapter is more closely related to
Mishkin and Savastano (2001), who argue that policymakers can
choose from among a wide set of monetary frameworks, but their
ability to deliver price stability will ultimately be determined by
their credibility, as captured in this chapter by the robustness of the
public’s longer-term inflation expectations.
33This is consistent with the evolution of anchoring in the sample.
The position of economies in the ranking for anchoring has changed
little over time (Online Annex 3.3).

112

and is modeled as a temporary surge in the country
risk premium.34
The degree of monetary policy credibility and the
strength of inflation expectations anchoring significantly affect how the model economy responds to the
sudden-stop shock (Figure 3.12). Regardless of the
degree of credibility, the external shock induces a sharp
nominal currency depreciation (not shown in Figure 3.12), which boosts actual inflation. In the economy with a more credible central bank, longer-term
inflation expectations are better anchored, and inflation more quickly returns to its long-run level once
the effect of the shock dissipates. The result implies a
smaller exchange rate pass-through to consumer prices
and lower inflation persistence.
With a shorter-lived deviation of inflation from its
target, the monetary policy rate need not increase by
as much in response to the adverse shock, and can
return to its neutral level sooner, leading to a smaller
cumulative decline in output.35 In sum, the persistence
of inflationary shocks is smaller, and monetary policy
can focus more on fighting recessions when credibility is higher and expectations are better anchored,
thereby increasing the economy’s resilience to adverse
external shocks.

The Taper Tantrum Episode
How did key macroeconomic variables in emerging
markets react to the taper tantrum in the summer of
2013? The episode was based on a sudden expectation
of an imminent move toward monetary normalization in the United States (via a tapering off of bond
purchases by the Federal Reserve), which boosted risk
premiums on debt instruments in emerging markets.
Among the advantages of studying this shock are that
it is related to an expectation of de facto monetary
policy tightening in the advanced economies, it is well
identified, and it is exogenous to emerging markets.
Did the response during the taper tantrum episode
differ across emerging markets according to how well
anchored their inflation expectations were, as would be
predicted by the model?36
34The framework follows Alichi and others (2009) and Al-Mashat
and others (2018a), which extend a conventional monetary model to
allow for imperfect credibility. See Online Annex 3.4 for details.
35The expected real interest rate also increases by less in the country with a more credible central bank.
36This analysis does not imply that anchoring is the ultimate
driver of the differences in macroeconomic outcomes. As discussed

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize

The empirical exercise estimates the responses of the
variables of interest—the exchange rate, inflation, output, and the policy rate—to the taper tantrum shock.37
To tease out the differential effects arising from
variations in the extent of anchoring, the economies
in the sample are sorted into a more-anchored and a
less-anchored group, as defined in Online Annex 3.3,
and responses specific to each group are estimated.38
In each of the two country groups, the currency
depreciates on impact, as predicted by the model
(Figure 3.13, panel 1). The initial depreciation is somewhat smaller in the less-anchored group, which could
be an indication of “fear of floating” (see Calvo and
Reinhart 2002).39 However, after the first two months,
the depreciation effect equalizes across the two groups.
The response of consumer prices suggests a very persistent and statistically significant increase in the price
level for the less-anchored economies and, broadly, no
consumer price impact in the more-anchored group.
The differences between the two groups are statistically
significant at all horizons (Figure 3.13, panel 2).
A comparison of the responses of the exchange
rate and consumer prices between the two groups of
countries suggests that the exchange rate pass-through
during the taper tantrum event was substantially larger
in countries with less-anchored inflation expectations. A systematic exploration of the exchange rate
and consumer price responses across the two groups
of economies confirms that the pass-through of
currency depreciations is lower in economies with
better-anchored inflation expectations (Figure 3.14).40

Figure 3.12. Gains from Anchoring Inﬂation Expectations
(Percentage points)

Model simulations suggest that when monetary policy is credible and inﬂation
expectations are better anchored, the economy is more resilient to adverse
external shocks.
High credibility

Low credibility

0.15 1. Three-Year–ahead Inﬂation Expectations
0.10
0.05
0.00
–0.05
0

4

8

12

16

20

24

8

12

16

20

24

8

12

16

20

24

12

16

20

24

0.6 2. Headline Consumer Price Index
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
–0.1

0

4

0.6 3. Policy Rate
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

in the previous section, the varying extent of anchoring can be
explained by fundamental macroeconomic factors, including the
quality of fiscal and monetary policy frameworks.
37The estimates are produced with a local projection framework
(Jordà 2005; Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor 2013). The methodology is closely related to an event study approach (see, for example,
de Carvalho Filho 2011; Obstfeld 2014; and Ahmed, Coulibaly, and
Zlate 2017), but controls for lags of the dependent variable.
38Details of the estimation strategy and a discussion of robustness
checks for the results of this section are in Online Annex 3.5.
39As discussed further below, fear of floating could help explain
weak anchoring if the central bank compromises its inflation goals to
achieve exchange rate stability.
40See Online Annex 3.5 for details. These results are obtained
from a reduced-form estimation that does not distinguish between
the underlying sources of movements in the exchange rate and,
therefore, need to be interpreted with caution (Forbes, Hjortsoe,
and Nenova 2015). Reassuringly, however, the magnitude of the
pass-through for the less-anchored countries after six months (equal
to 11 percent) is comparable to the estimates obtained from the
taper tantrum event exercise (14 percent), where the underlying
shock is well identified. For the more-anchored countries, the magnitudes of the pass-through are 1 percent and 5 percent, respectively.

0.0
–0.1
0

4

0.0 4. Output (Cumulative Change)
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.8
–1.0
–1.2
0

4

8

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgures show impulse responses to a “sudden-stop” shock, deﬁned as
an increase in the country-speciﬁc risk premium, using a semistructural monetary
model described in Online Annex 3.4. X-axis labels indicate time in quarters, with
the shock occurring at time = 1.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

113

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 3.13. Response to the Taper Tantrum

Figure 3.14. Cumulative Exchange Rate Pass-Through

Economies with better-anchored inﬂation expectations were more resilient to the
taper tantrum episode in the summer of 2013—they experienced a smaller increase
in inﬂation and could keep monetary policy relatively more accommodative.

The exchange rate pass-through to consumer prices is lower in economies with
better-anchored inﬂation expectations.

(Percentage points)

More-anchored

(Percentage points)

0.30

Less-anchored

8 1. Exchange Rate

More-anchored
Less-anchored

0.25

6

0.20
4

0.15

2
0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

1.0 2. Consumer Prices

0.10

0.05

0.5

0.00

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

0.0

–0.5
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

0.2 3. Growth Forecast
0.0
–0.2

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. The ﬁgure
shows the cumulative impulse response of headline consumer prices to a 1
percent change in the nominal effective exchange rate (see Online Annex 3.5 for
details). X-axis denotes time in months. The shaded area corresponds to 90
percent conﬁdence intervals computed with Driscoll-Kraay standard errors. Solid
squares (unﬁlled circles) for responses denote that the difference between the two
responses is statistically signiﬁcant (not statistically signiﬁcant) at a 90 percent
conﬁdence level. The criterion to classify countries as more- and less-anchored is
deﬁned in Online Annex 3.3.

–0.4
–0.6
–0.8

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

0.2 4. Monetary Policy Rate
0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.4
0

1

2

3

4

5

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. The ﬁgures
show the cumulative impulse response to the taper tantrum episode (see Online
Annex 3.5 for details). An increase in the exchange rate denotes a depreciation.
X-axis denotes time in months. The episode is deﬁned as equal to 1 in May 2013.
The shaded areas correspond to 90 percent conﬁdence intervals computed with
Driscoll-Kraay standard errors. Solid squares (unﬁlled circles) for responses
denote that the difference between the two responses is statistically signiﬁcant
(not statistically signiﬁcant) at a 90 percent conﬁdence level. The criterion to
classify countries as more- and less-anchored is deﬁned in Online Annex 3.3.

114

6

These findings are consistent with several earlier
studies.41
In terms of the monetary policy dilemma and the
response of the policy rate, the less-anchored country
group faced a starker trade-off between fighting inflation and countering falling growth prospects during
the taper tantrum episode.42 Although, in contrast to
the more-anchored group, these countries experienced
a significant fall in expected output growth, they did
41Taylor (2000) argues that improvements in monetary performance, as reflected in price stability and better-anchored inflation
expectations, result in an endogenous reduction of exchange rate
pass-through. Several studies have found evidence in line with this
hypothesis, including Gagnon and Ihrig (2001), Choudhri and Hakura (2006), Edwards (2006), Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel (2007),
Carrière-Swallow and others (2016), and Caselli and Roitman (2016).
42Given the monthly frequency of the estimation, the analysis
proxies the response of output using one-year-ahead growth forecasts
from Consensus Forecasts. An alternative exercise, using quarterly
data and analyzing the reaction of actual output growth to the taper
tantrum shock, shows similar results, confirming more a negative
output response in less-anchored countries.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize

not pursue looser monetary policies. Indeed, there is
no significant difference in the response of the policy
rate across the two groups at any horizon.
In sum, the analysis suggests that economies with
better-anchored inflation expectations were more
resilient to the taper tantrum episode and were able to
keep monetary policy relatively more accommodative.

Countercyclical Monetary Policy
How general are the findings of the taper tantrum episode? When output enters a cyclical decline,
could the monetary authorities in countries with
more-anchored inflation expectations act more countercyclically than authorities in less-anchored countries,
focusing more on reducing output fluctuations?
Following Végh and Vuletin (2014) and Végh and
others (2017), an examination of a simple correlation
between the detrended policy rate and the output gap
reveals that monetary policy in both country groups, on
average, reacted countercyclically to output gap developments over the first quarter of 2004 to the first quarter
of 2018 (Figure 3.15). The countercyclical response
was stronger in the more-anchored group. However,
such correlation-based findings can be subject to several
criticisms. First, they need not be informative of the
monetary policy dilemma that policymakers in emerging markets face when hit by adverse external shocks,
as monetary policy tradeoffs can vary depending on
the nature of the underlying shock. Second, a simple
correlation does not control for other factors important
to policymakers. For example, if exchange rate stability
is an additional policy objective and the exchange rate is
correlated with the output gap, the estimated response
of the policy rate to the output gap may be biased.
To address these limitations, this section estimates
a monetary policy reaction function for the emerging markets in the sample. Following Taylor (1993)
and Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012), the specification allows for inertia in monetary policy and
includes the inflation rate, the output gap, and the
change in the nominal effective exchange rate. The
estimated coefficient on the output gap is interpreted
as a measure of monetary policy countercyclicality. To
assess whether the extent of anchoring influences the
ability to conduct countercyclical policy, the estimation
allows the coefficients in the monetary policy reaction
function to differ between countries in the more- and
less-anchored groups.43
43See

Online Annex 3.6 for details.

Figure 3.15. Correlation between Detrended Policy Rate and
Output Gap, 2004:Q1–2018:Q1
(Percent)

A simple correlation analysis suggests that over 2004–18 monetary authorities
tended to react more to output gap ﬂuctuations in economies with better-anchored
inﬂation expectations.
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.2

More-anchored

Less-anchored

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. The dots
denote the median correlation across countries and the vertical lines denote the
interquartile range. Monetary policy rate series have been detrended by the
Hodrick-Prescott ﬁlter, following Végh and Vuletin (2014). The output gap is
measured by the real-time output gap from the World Economic Outlook database if
available, or by detrended real output using the Hodrick-Prescott ﬁlter. The criterion
to classify countries as more- and less-anchored is deﬁned in Online Annex 3.3.

To focus on adverse external shocks that can potentially pose a dilemma between stabilizing output and
inflation, such as the one examined in the event study
of the taper tantrum, two complementary identification strategies are used. First, the regression analysis is
restricted to 2011–15, when emerging markets experienced a substantial slowdown in net capital inflows.44
Second, the domestic output gap is instrumented
with shocks to the global risk premium, as captured
by the Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility
Index (VIX).
The results show that the output gap coefficient is smaller for less-anchored countries than for
more-anchored ones for all specifications and, in
two of these, the difference between the two output
44See Chapter 2 of the April 2016 WEO for a detailed examination of this slowdown episode and Online Annex Figure 3.6.1 for
the evolution of net capital inflows to the countries in the sample.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

115

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Figure 3.16. Effects of Less-Anchored Inﬂation Expectations:
Regression Results, 2004:Q1–2018:Q1
(Percentage points)

Model estimates suggest that monetary policy reacts more to output ﬂuctuations
and less to exchange rate developments in countries with better-anchored
inﬂation expectations—including in periods when adverse external shocks pose a
dilemma between stabilizing output and inﬂation.
0.05 1. Effect on Countercyclicality of Monetary Policy

0.2

0.00

0.0

–0.05

–0.2

–0.10

–0.4

–0.15

–0.6

–0.20

2004:Q1–18:Q1
OLS

11:Q1–15:Q4
OLS

04:Q1–18:Q1
IV (right scale)

–0.8

0.05 2. Effect on Response of Monetary Policy to Changes in the NEER
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00
–0.01

2004:Q1–18:Q1
OLS

2011:Q1–15:Q4
OLS

2004:Q1–18:Q1
IV

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: IV = instrumental variables; NEER = nominal effective exchange rate;
OLS = ordinary least squares. See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country
coverage. The ﬁgure shows the effect on the output gap coefﬁcient (panel 1) and
the exchange rate coefﬁcient (panel 2) of being a less-anchored country rather
than a more-anchored country from estimated monetary policy reaction functions.
Each panel summarizes results from three regression speciﬁcations. Starting from
the left, the ﬁrst regression result refers to a full-sample OLS speciﬁcation, the
second regression result refers to the OLS speciﬁcation in which the impact of
more- or less-anchored inﬂation expectations is identiﬁed from the
2011:Q1–15:Q4 period only, and the third regression result refers to a full-sample
instrumental variable speciﬁcation (see Online Annex 3.6 for details). The criterion
to classify countries as more- and less-anchored is deﬁned in Online Annex 3.3.

gap coefficients is statistically different from zero
(Figure 3.16). The results also suggest that the coefficient on the nominal effective exchange rate is larger
for less-anchored countries.45 Thus, monetary policy
45The results could indicate that fear of floating leads to
less-anchored inflation expectations. But there are other possible
explanations, and more research is needed before drawing strong
conclusions.

116

in less-anchored countries not only responds less to
output gap fluctuations, but it also responds more to
fluctuations in the nominal effective exchange rate.
Overall, these findings suggest that the ability to
conduct countercyclical monetary policy in emerging
markets is positively linked to the extent of anchoring
of inflation expectations.46
Taken together, the results in this section suggest
that well-anchored expectations can attenuate the
monetary policy dilemma faced by emerging markets
when they are hit by adverse external shocks. The inflationary impact of such shocks is smaller when inflation
expectations are more anchored, allowing monetary
policy to focus more on smoothing output fluctuations, thus improving the resilience of the economy.

Summary and Policy Implications
Following a period of disinflation during the 1990s
and early 2000s, inflation in emerging market and
developing economies has remained low and stable.
This chapter examines the low and stable inflation
experience in 19 emerging markets during 2004–18
to determine whether the recent gains in inflation
performance are sustainable as global financial conditions normalize.
The chapter finds that, for the average sample
emerging market, the gains in inflation performance
have been broad based—present across alternative
price measures and geographic regions, as well as in
terms of both inflation levels and inflation variability.
At the same time, the gains are not uniform, as some
emerging markets continue to find it challenging to
keep inflation low and stable in the face of capital flow
reversals and exchange rate pressures. Average inflation
in several sample economies remained in double-digit
territory during the period under study. The main
driver of deviations of inflation from target is fluctuations in longer-term inflation expectations, while
the role of global factors is more limited. Zooming in
on the behavior of inflation expectations reveals that
the extent of expectations anchoring has improved
but remains subpar in many emerging markets relative to the better-performing peers and relative to
advanced economies.
46The findings are qualitatively robust to the exclusion of the
global financial crisis period (third quarter of 2007 to the first
quarter of 2009) and to alternative groupings of more-anchored and
less-anchored economies.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize

What do these findings imply for inflation, and for
economic outcomes more broadly, as global financial
conditions normalize? To the extent that a tightening of
global financial conditions leads to currency depreciations in emerging markets, some adjustment in relative
prices and a temporary increase in their inflation rates
is to be expected. But if expectations are well anchored,
price stability would not be jeopardized. Indeed, the
analysis shows that more-anchored inflation expectations
reduce inflation persistence and limit the pass-through
of currency depreciations to domestic prices, allowing
monetary policy to focus more on reducing output
fluctuations. Subpar levels of anchoring of longer-term
inflation expectations can constrain central banks’
monetary policy responses and make emerging markets
more vulnerable to adverse external shocks, such as the
ongoing normalization of monetary policy in the United
States and other advanced economies.
In terms of policy implications, the chapter argues
that domestic fiscal and monetary policy frameworks
can significantly affect the performance of output
and inflation in response to adverse external shocks
through their impact on the extent of anchoring of
inflation expectations. One important implication is
that emerging markets are not simply bystanders to
the forces of globalization and financial conditions in
advanced economies.47 By improving fiscal and monetary policy frameworks over the past two decades,
47Chapter 3 of the April 2017 Global Financial Stability Report
draws similar conclusions regarding the domestic impact of global
financial conditions.

emerging markets have succeeded in reducing inflation
to low and sustainable levels. Whether these gains
will be maintained largely depends on policymakers’
continued commitment to improving the long-term
sustainability of fiscal frameworks, including by
adopting fiscal rules, and preserving and rebuilding
fiscal buffers where necessary. Equally important is
their commitment to improving the credibility of
central banks, which can be achieved by consolidating
and enhancing their independence, as well as through
improvements in timeliness, clarity, transparency,
and openness in communications. In this context, it
is notable that public debt has increased in emerging markets over the past decade and is projected to
increase further in many of the largest economies over
the next five years (see Chapter 1). Also, a number of
less-anchored emerging markets have more recently
come under considerable pressures from exchange
rate depreciations and shorter-term inflation. These
developments suggest that the past gains in inflation
performance cannot be taken for granted and require
continued improvements in fiscal and monetary policy frameworks.
The chapter also emphasizes that anchoring inflation
expectations takes time, which suggests that policymakers in emerging markets should consolidate and
further improve the extent of anchoring of inflation
expectations, even when favorable economic conditions
prevail. In countries where the credibility of monetary
frameworks is relatively low, the emphasis should be on
communicating clearly the reasons for policy actions
taken in response to global developments.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

117

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Box 3.1. Inflation Dynamics in a Wider Group of Emerging Market and Developing Economies
This box compares (1) basic macroeconomic characteristics and (2) headline inflation dynamics for a
wider group of 71 emerging market and developing
economies with the 19 emerging markets covered in
the chapter (termed here the “sample” economies).1 The
wider set of 71 economies is separated into (1) 33 other
emerging markets, and (2) 38 low-income developing
countries, as defined in the World Economic Outlook
classification, and referred to hereafter as the “other
two country groups.”
The 19 emerging markets covered in the chapter
are among the largest emerging markets (Figure 3.1.1,
panel 1). This sample is representative of the broader
set of emerging markets along several dimensions,
including GDP per capita and financial development
(Figure 3.1.1, panels 2 and 3). Also, countries in all
three groups grow at a comparable pace (Figure 3.1.1,
panel 4) and exhibit similar openness to international
trade over the sample period (Figure 3.1.1, panel
5). One difference is that the 19 sample economies
have more flexible exchange rates, although several
of them exhibit degrees of exchange rate flexibility
that are comparable to those of economies in the
other two country groups (Figure 3.1.1, panel 6).
Greater exchange rate rigidity can contribute to higher
inflation volatility for commodity exporters when
facing large commodity price swings.2 Beyond this
specific set of countries, the approach pursued in the
chapter emphasizes the broader concept of credible
monetary policy frameworks, as captured by the extent
of anchoring of inflation expectations, in delivering
The authors of this box are Francesca Caselli and Jilun Xing.
1The wider group includes all emerging markets and
low-income developing countries not included in the core
sample of 19 countries, except countries with (1) populations
of fewer than 2 million people or (2) at least one episode
of hyperinflation, defined as annual inflation of more than
100 percent. The selection of the core sample of 19 economies is
driven by data availability. The key data constraint for inclusion
in the core sample of countries is the availability of longer-term
(three-year-ahead and longer) forecasts for inflation.
2Several countries in the “other two country groups” exhibit
limited exchange rate flexibility and are heavily dependent on
commodities. Under a fixed exchange rate, when commodity
export prices increase, both domestic and import prices rise
(given higher domestic demand, which raises nontradables prices,
including distribution margins for imports), with the adjustment
to the income windfall taking place through relative prices rather
than the exchange rate. Conversely, periods of weak commodity export prices put downward pressure on domestic demand
and prices. By contrast, under a flexible exchange rate part of
the terms-of-trade movement is absorbed by the exchange rate,
dampening the effect of this type of shock on inflation.

118

Figure 3.1.1. Comparison of Macro
Characteristics across Country Groups
1. Nominal GDP
2. Real GDP per Capita
(Trillion PPP
(Thousand PPP
international dollars)
constant 2011
4.0
international dollars)
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Sample Other LIDCs
Sample Other LIDCs
EMs EMs
EMs EMs

125

3. Credit to GDP
(Percent)

4. Real GDP Growth
(Percent)

30
25
20
15
10
5
0

10

100

8

75

6

50

4

25

2

0

160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

Sample Other LIDCs
EMs EMs
5. Trade Openness
(Percent of GDP)

Sample Other
EMs EMs

LIDCs

6. Exchange Rate
Flexibility
(Index)

0

15
12
9
6
3

Sample Other LIDCs
EMs EMs

Sample Other
EMs EMs

LIDCs

0

Sources: Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2017); World Bank;
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: EMs = emerging markets; LIDCs = low-income
developing countries; PPP = purchasing power parity. See
Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage.
The horizontal line in each box represents the median across
countries calculated over the period 2004–17; the upper and
lower edges of each box show the top and bottom quartiles;
and the vertical lines denote the range between the top and
bottom deciles. A higher value of the exchange rate index
means greater ﬂexibility.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize

Box 3.1 (continued)
price stability over the narrower focus on the exchange
rate regime.
Inflation dynamics in the wider group of other
emerging markets and low-income developing
countries (the “other two country groups”) show
broadly similar trends to that of the sample economies. Headline consumer price inflation in the other
two country groups declined between the mid-1990s
and the mid-2000s, and, on average, remained lower
thereafter (Figure 3.1.2, panel 1). The number of
countries with double-digit headline inflation also fell
dramatically from the 1990s in all three groups. Less
than 15 percent of the countries exhibited double-digit
inflation at the end of the sample period, compared
with 50–70 percent in 1995 (Figure 3.1.2, panel 2).
Inflation volatility in the other two country groups
also declined after 2004 (Figure 3.1.2, panel 3).
However, a focus on the post-2004 period reveals
some heterogeneity across the three groups. The
average inflation rates for the other emerging market
and low-income developing country groups, at 7 percent and 8 percent, respectively, remain higher than
those of the sample group, at 5 percent (Figure 3.1.2,
panel 1). Similarly, volatility of inflation in the other
two country groups remains higher than in the sample
countries (Figure 3.1.2, panel 3).
What are the factors that could have contributed
to higher inflation rates in the other two country
groups? Compared with the sample, inflation in these
two groups follows the evolution of commodity price
inflation more closely (Figure 3.1.3, panel 1), pointing
to stronger exposure of these economies to commodity
price fluctuations. Indeed, the largest economies in the
broader sample include several oil exporters, where the
strength of domestic demand is heavily influenced by oil
prices. The comovement of inflation with commodity
prices is particularly evident in the period after 2004:
headline inflation peaks along with the 2008 commodity price spike, declines during the global financial
crisis, rebounds later, and finally drops again. Overall,
this evidence suggests that economies in the other two
country groups were not fully successful in smoothing the repeated commodity shocks they faced in the
postcrisis period. Moreover, in low-income developing
countries food accounts for a larger share of consumption expenditure, and higher food shares are linked to
higher inflation (Figure 3.1.3, panel 2).
The greater sensitivity of inflation in the other two
country groups to commodity price swings could
reflect differences in the quality of the institutional
and policy frameworks. For instance, Choi and

Figure 3.1.2. Inﬂation Dynamics
(Percent)

35 1. Headline Consumer Price Index Inﬂation
30

Sample EMs
Other EMs
LIDCs

25
20
15
10
5
0
1995

2000

05

10

15

18

80 2. Share of Countries with Double-Digit Inﬂation
70
Sample EMs
60
Other EMs
50
LIDCs
40
30
20
10
0
1995
2000
05
10
15
18
25 3. Volatility of Headline Consumer Price Index
1995–2003
2004–18

20
15
10
5
0

Sample EMs

Other EMs

LIDCs

Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: EMs = emerging markets; LIDCs = low-income
developing countries. See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources
and country coverage. The lines in panel 1 denote averages
weighted by nominal GDP. The weights are time invariant
and computed between 2010 and 2012. The lines in panel 2
denote the share of countries with headline consumer price
index greater than or equal to 10 percent. Volatility is
computed as the standard deviation of headline inﬂation.
The dots (vertical lines) in panel 3 denote the medians
(interquartile ranges).

others (2018) find that, over time, a more credible
monetary policy, together with reduced reliance on
energy imports, lessens the impact of oil price shocks
on inflation. Gelos and Ustyugova (2017) find that
commodity price shocks have less persistent effects in
countries with independent central banks, lower initial
inflation, and better governance. Consistent with
these results, central bank transparency—a proxy for

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

119

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Box 3.1 (continued)
Figure 3.1.3. Inﬂation, Food Shares, and
Commodity Prices

Figure 3.1.4. Central Bank Transparency
(Index)

(Percent)

10

1998–2003
2004–16

1. Inﬂation and Commodity Price Index Change
Sample EMs
LIDCs

Other EMs
Commodity price index change
(right scale)

15

40

12

8

6

20

9

4
0

6
3
0
2004

10

15

–20

2

–40
18

0

2. Inﬂation and Food Share in Consumption Basket
Other EMs

LIDCs

Average CPI inﬂation, 2004–16

20
15
10

Other EMs

LIDCs

Sources: Dincer and Eichengreen (2014); and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: EMs = emerging markets; LIDCs = low-income
developing countries. See Online Annex 3.1 for data
sources and country coverage. The dots (vertical lines)
denote the medians (interquartile ranges) of each group.
The transparency index ranges from 0 to 15 and reﬂects
the sum of the scores attributed to responses to various
questions about political, economic, procedural, and
operational transparency. An increase represents an
improvement in the index.

5
0
10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65
Share of food in consumption basket

Sources: International Labour Organization; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: CPI = consumer price index; EMs = emerging markets;
LIDCs = low-income developing countries. See Online Annex
3.1 for data sources and country coverage. In panel 1, the
solid lines denote averages weighted by nominal GDP. The
weights are time invariant and computed between 2010 and
2012. The dashed line corresponds to the change in the
commodity price index (2005 = 100) of a broad set of
commodities. In panel 2, the solid lines denote the ﬁtted
regression lines for each group. The slope coefﬁcient is
signiﬁcant for LIDCs, but not for other EMs.

120

Sample EMs

the quality of the monetary policy framework—in
the other two country groups exhibits a slower pace
of improvement and remains significantly below the
levels of the sample group (Figure 3.1.4). Lack of
a clear communication strategy about the inflation
outlook and the presence of multiple inconsistent
objectives contribute to lower transparency levels in
low-income developing countries (IMF 2015). Furthermore, because economies with less transparent and
credible monetary policy frameworks tend to exhibit a
higher degree of exchange rate pass-through, external
shocks to such economies tend to be more inflationary
than for economies with better monetary frameworks
(Carrière-Swallow and others 2016). Finally, sound
fiscal institutions are also a precondition for credible monetary policy. Combes and others (2017), for
example, find that the interaction of inflation targeting
and fiscal rules has a beneficial effect on both fiscal
balances and inflation.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize

Box 3.2. Clarity of Central Bank Communications and the Extent of Anchoring of Inflation
Expectations
“Successful central bank communication efforts should
make policy more predictable and market expectations of
future short rates more accurate” (Blinder and others 2008).

Figure 3.2.1. Frequency of Monetary Policy
Surprises, 2010–13 versus 2014–18

Over the past two decades, central banks in an
increasing number of emerging market and developing
economies have adopted inflation targeting—a policy
that sets an inflation goal and emphasizes transparency and clear communication with the public to help
achieve it. The change coincided with improved anchoring of longer-term inflation expectations in many of
those economies, but substantial variations in the extent
of anchoring still exist. This box shows that more transparent and clear communication by the central bank
can improve the anchoring of inflation expectations by
reducing uncertainty about future policy actions.
One way in which the central bank can influence
the anchoring of inflation expectations is by helping
improve the ability of the public to anticipate its
adjustments to the monetary policy rate. An empirical glimpse into the clarity and consistency of the
central bank’s policy rate decisions can be obtained
by measuring the frequency with which central
bank decisions differ from what the market expects
just before the release of policy announcements.
The evidence shows that achieving a high degree of
monetary policy predictability has been challenging for emerging market and developing economies
(Figure 3.2.1). Despite important steps taken to
strengthen monetary policy frameworks during the
past two decades, the predictability of policy rate
actions by their central banks remains below that of
more seasoned inflation-targeting central banks in
advanced economies. Furthermore, the evidence shows
uneven improvement over time for emerging market
and developing economies.
Can poor predictability of monetary policy rate
actions affect the anchoring of inflation expectations?
Poor predictability may reflect a lack of public understanding about the central bank’s policy strategy. Alternatively, it may indicate the public’s doubt about the
central bank’s commitment to price stability. In either
case, inflation expectations may not be anchored to
the central bank’s target, which has important implications for policy. In this regard, a significant relationship appears between the predictability of monetary

30

The authors of this box are Yan Carrière-Swallow
and Juan Yépez.

(Percent of total decisions)

2010–13
2014–18
20

ADV

MEX

PHL

THA

HUN

POL

PER

TUR

CHL

ROU

IND

COL

0

BRA

10

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: ADV = average for eight advanced economies. See
Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage.
Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. Surprises are the difference
between the decision regarding the monetary policy rate and
the average forecast among analysts surveyed by
Bloomberg the day of the policy announcement.

policy and the degree of anchoring of medium-term
(two-years-ahead) inflation expectations (Figure 3.2.2).
How can monetary policy be made more predictable? In general terms, predictability requires having
a clear policy function that the public understands.
Indeed, monetary policy is more predictable in economies where the central bank operates more transparently (Figure 3.2.3). Another characteristic of more
predictable central banks is that their communication
tends to be easier to understand because it uses plain
language and clear sentence structures.
What can central banks do to improve transparency and the quality of their communication? Elements of best practices for transparent central banking
include the announcement of a clear objective and
frequent and regular publication of statements,
minutes, and reports that give an account of the
factors behind policy decisions and an assessment of
how those factors are likely to evolve over the policy

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

121

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Box 3.2 (continued)
Figure 3.2.2. Monetary Policy Predictability
and Anchoring of Inﬂation Expectations

Figure 3.2.3. Central Bank Communication
and Monetary Policy Predictability
30

RUS

25
COL

20

BRA

IDN
R 2 = 0.485

15

10

ROU
AUS

KOR

PER

HUN
NOR

IND

MEX

CHL

POL THA
NZL
5 CZE
PHL
CAN
USA GBR
0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Absolute deviation of two-year-ahead inﬂation
expectations from central bank target, 2010–17

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Consensus Economics;
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country
coverage. For the deﬁnition of monetary policy surprises see
notes to Figure 3.2.1. Solid line shows the best linear ﬁt
between the variables. Data labels use International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.

horizon. Improvements along these lines over the
past decade have brought the level of transparency in
emerging market and developing economies much
closer to the levels observed in advanced economies
(Dincer and Eichengreen 2014). The Central Bank of
Chile, for example, added information to the policy
statements released after the meetings, such as the
vote tally and the main arguments given by the members of the board.
Several countries, including Chile, Colombia,
and Mexico, have also implemented reforms to their

122

Frequency of monetary policy surprises, 2010–18
(percent of total decisions)

Frequency of monetary policy surprises, 2010–18
(percent of total decisions)

30

Transparency
Readability

25

20
R 2 = 0.4935

15

10
R 2 = 0.2856

5

0
4

6
8
10
12
14
Central bank transparency index and
Flesch reading ease index

16

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Dincer and Eichengreen
(2014); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The Flesch reading ease (RE) index is used for central
bank press releases in English, which is deﬁned as
RE = 0.33[206.835 – (1.015 × ASL) – (84.6 × ASW)], in
which ASL = average sentence length and ASW = average
number of syllables per word. See Online Annex 3.1 for data
sources and country coverage. Solid lines show the best
linear ﬁt between the variables. The sample includes 21
inﬂation-targeting economies.

communication strategies to increase the clarity of the
information made available to the public. For instance,
they have streamlined communication events to focus
on medium-term developments; reduced the frequency
of monetary policy meetings, aligning them with the
release of the monetary policy report; and revamped
the content of their policy statements, giving a richer
account of the macroeconomic context and explaining
why certain policy actions were taken.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize

References
Adrian, Tobias, Douglas Laxton, and Maurice Obstfeld. 2018.
“A Robust and Adaptable Nominal Anchor.” In Advancing the
Frontiers of Monetary Policy, edited by Tobias Adrian, Douglas
Laxton, and Maurice Obstfeld. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Ahmed, Shaghil, Brahima Coulibaly, and Andrei Zlate. 2017.
“International Financial Spillovers to Emerging Market
Economies: How Important Are Economic Fundamentals?”
Journal of International Money and Finance 76: 133–52.
Alichi, Ali, Huigang Chen, Kevin Clinton, Charles Freedman,
Marianne Johnson, Ondra Kamenik, Turgut Kışınbay, and
Douglas Laxton. 2009. “Inflation Targeting under Imperfect
Policy Credibility.” IMF Working Paper 09/94, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Al-Mashat, Rania, Kevin Clinton, Douglas Laxton, and Hou
Wang. 2018a. “India: Stabilizing Inflation.” In Advancing the
Frontiers of Monetary Policy, edited by Tobias Adrian, Douglas
Laxton, and Maurice Obstfeld. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
———. 2018b. “Managing Expectations.” In Advancing the
Frontiers of Monetary Policy, edited by Tobias Adrian, Douglas
Laxton, and Maurice Obstfeld. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Aslam, Aqib, Natalija Novta, and Fabiano Rodrigues-Bastos.
2017. “Calculating Trade in Value Added.” IMF Working Paper 17/178, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Auer, Raphael, Claudio Borio, and Andrew Filardo. 2017.
“The Globalisation of Inflation: The Growing Importance
of Global Value Chains.” CEPR Discussion Paper 11905,
Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.
Auer, Raphael, Andrei Levchenko, and Philip Sauré. Forthcoming. “International Inflation Spillovers through Input
Linkages.” Review of Economics and Statistics.
Ball, Laurence M., and Niamh Sheridan. 2005. “Does Inflation
Targeting Matter?” In The Inflation-Targeting Debate, edited
by Ben S. Bernanke and Michael Woodford. NBER Studies
in Income and Wealth. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Blinder, Alan S., Michael Ehrmann, Marcel Fratzscher, Jacob de
Haan, and David-Jan Jansen. 2008. “Central Bank Communication and Monetary Policy: A Survey of Theory and
Evidence.” Journal of Economic Literature 46 (4): 910–45.
Borio, Claudio, and Andrew Filardo. 2007. “Globalisation and
Inflation: New Cross-Country Evidence on the Global Determinants of Domestic Inflation.” BIS Working Paper 227,
Bank for International Settlements, Basel.
Brainard, William. 1967. “Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of
Policy.” American Economic Review 57: 411–25.
Brito, Steve, Yan Carrière-Swallow, and Bertrand Gruss. 2018.
“Disagreement about Future Inflation: Understanding the
Benefits of Inflation Targeting and Transparency.” IMF

Working Paper 18/24, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Caldas Montes, Gabriel, and Tatiana Acar. 2018. “Fiscal Credibility and Disagreement in Expectations about Inflation:
Evidence for Brazil.” Economics Bulletin 38 (2): 826–43.
Calvo, Guillermo A. 1998. “Capital Flows and Capital-Market
Crises: The Simple Economics of Sudden Stops.” Journal of
Applied Economics 1 (November): 35–54.
Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carmen M. Reinhart. 2002. “Fear of
Floating.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (2): 379–408.
Capistrán, Carlos, and Manuel Ramos-Francia. 2010. “Does
Inflation Targeting Affect the Dispersion of Inflation Expectations?” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42 (1): 113–34.
Carney, Mark. 2017. “[De]Globalization and Inflation.” IMF
Michel Camdessus Central Banking Lecture, Washington,
DC, September 18.
Carrière-Swallow, Yan, Bertrand Gruss, Nicolás E. Magud, and
Fabián Valencia. 2016. “Monetary Policy Credibility and
Exchange Rate Pass-Through.” IMF Working Paper 16/240,
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Caselli, Francesca, and Agustin Roitman. 2016. “Non-Linear
Exchange Rate Pass-Through in Emerging Markets.”
IMF Working Paper 16/1, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Celasun, Oya, Gaston Gelos, and Alessandro Prati. 2004.
“Obstacles to Disinflation: What Is the Role of Fiscal Expectations?” Economic Policy 19 (40): 442–81.
Choi, Sangyup, Davide Furceri, Prakash Loungani, Saurabh
Mishra, and Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro. 2018. “Oil Prices
and Inflation Dynamics: Evidence from Advanced and
Developing Economies.” Journal of International Money and
Finance 82: 71–96.
Choudhri, Ehsan, and Dalia Hakura. 2006. “Exchange Rate
Pass-Through to Domestic Prices: Does the Inflationary Environment Matter?” Journal of International Money and Finance
25 (4): 614–39.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2012. “Why Are
Target Interest Rate Changes So Persistent?” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4: 126–62.
Combes, Jean-Louis, Xavier Debrun, Alexandru Minea, and
Rene Tapsoba. 2017. “Inflation Targeting, Fiscal Rules, and
the Policy Mix: Cross-Effects and Interactions.” Economic
Journal, published online July 18.
Cukierman, Alex, and Allan Meltzer. 1986. “A Theory of
Ambiguity, Credibility and Inflation under Discretion
and Asymmetric Information.” Econometrica 54 (September): 1099–128.
de Carvalho Filho, Irineu. 2011. “28 Months Later: How
Inflation Targeters Outperformed Their Peers in the Great
Recession.” The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics 1 (1): 1–46.
Demertzis, Maria, Massimiliano Marcellino, and Nicola Viegi.
2012. “A Credibility Proxy: Tracking US Monetary Developments.” The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics 12 (1): 1–36.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

123

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth

Dincer, N. Nergiz, and Barry Eichengreen. 2014. “Central Bank
Transparency and Independence: Update and New Measures.”
International Journal of Central Banking 10 (1): 189–259.
Dovern, Jonas, Ulrich Fritsche, and Jiri Slacalek. 2012. “Disagreement among Forecasters in G7 Countries.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 94 (4): 1081–96.
Driscoll, John, and Aart Kraay. 1998. “Consistent Covariance
Matrix Estimation with Spatially Dependent Panel Data.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 80 (4): 549–60.
Edwards, Sebastian. 2006. “The Relationship between Exchange
Rates and Inflation Targeting Revisited.” NBER Working
Paper 12163, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Ehrmann, Michael. 2015. “Targeting Inflation from below: How
Do Inflation Expectations Behave?” International Journal of
Central Banking 11 (4): 213–49.
Forbes, Kristin, Ida Hjortsoe, and Tsvetelina Nenova. 2015.
“The Shocks Matter: Improving Our Estimates of Exchange
Rate Pass-Through.” Discussion Papers from Monetary Policy
Committee Unit 43, Bank of England, London.
Gagnon, Joseph, and Jane E. Ihrig. 2001. “Monetary Policy and
Exchange Rate Pass-Through.” International Finance Discussion Paper 704, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System of the United States, Washington, DC.
Galí, Jordi, and Mark Gertler. 1999. “Inflation Dynamics: A
Structural Econometric Analysis.” Journal of Monetary Economics 44 (2): 195–222.
Galí, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and J. David Lopez-Salido. 2001.
“European Inflation Dynamics.” European Economic Review
45 (7): 1237–70.
Galí, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and J. David Lopez-Salido, 2003.
Erratum to “European Inflation Dynamics.” European Economic Review 47 (4): 759–60.
Gelos, Gaston, and Yulia Ustyugova. 2017. “Inflation
Responses to Commodity Price Shocks—How and Why
Do Countries Differ?” Journal of International Money and
Finance 72: 28–47.
Gonçalves, Carlos, and Joao M. Salles. 2008. “Inflation Targeting in Emerging Economies: What Do the Data Say?” Journal
of Development Economics 85 (1–2): 312–18.
Goodhart, Charles A.E. 2005. “The Monetary Policy Committee’s Reaction Function: An Exercise in Estimation.” Topics in
Macroeconomics 5 (1): Article 18.
Gopinath, Gita. 2015. “The International Price System.” NBER
Working Paper 21646, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Andrew T. Levin, and Eric T. Swanson.
2010. “Does Inflation Targeting Anchor Long-Run Inflation
Expectations? Evidence from Long-Term Bond Yields in the
US, UK, and Sweden.” Journal of the European Economic
Association 8 (6): 1208–42
Ihrig, Jane, Steven B. Kamin, Deborah Lindner, and Jaimie
Marquez. 2010. “Some Simple Tests of the Globalization and
Inflation Hypothesis.” International Finance 13 (3): 343–75.

124

Ilzetzki, Ethan, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff.
2017. “Exchange Arrangements Entering the 21st Century:
Which Anchor Will Hold?” NBER Working Paper 23134,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Imbens, Guido W., and Joshua D. Angrist. 1994. “Identification
and Estimation of Local Average Treatment Effects.” Econometrica 62 (2): 467–75.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2015. “Evolving Monetary
Policy Frameworks in Low-Income and Other Developing
Countries—Background Paper: Country Experiences.” IMF
Staff Report, Washington, DC.
Jordà, Òscar. 2005. “Estimation and Inference of Impulse
Responses by Local Projections.” American Economic Review
95 (1): 161–82.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2013.
“When Credit Bites Back.” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking 45: 3–28.
King, Mervyn. 1995. “Credibility and Monetary Policy: Theory
and Evidence.” Scottish Journal of Political Economy 42: 1–19.
Kumar, Saten, Hassan Afrouzi, Olivier Coibion, and Yuriy
Gorodnichenko. 2015. “Inflation Targeting Does Not Anchor
Inflation Expectations: Evidence from Firms in New Zealand.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 46: 151–225.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2018. “The
External Wealth of Nations Revisited: International Financial
Integration in the Aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis.”
IMF Economic Review 66 (1): 189–222.
Levin, Andrew T., Fabio M. Natalucci, and Jeremy M. Piger.
2004. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Inflation Targeting.”
Review, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, July: 51–80.
Mankiw, N.G., R. Reis, and J. Wolfers. 2004. “Disagreement
about Inflation Expectations.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual
2003 18: 209–48.
Masson, Paul R., Miguel A. Savastano, and Sunil Sharma. 1997.
“The Scope for Inflation Targeting in Developing Countries.”
IMF Working Paper 97/130, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Mishkin, Frederic S. 2000. “Inflation Targeting in Emerging
Market Countries.” American Economic Review 90 (2): 105–9.
———. 2007. “Inflation Dynamics.” International Finance 10
(3): 317–34.
Mishkin, Frederic S., and Miguel A. Savastano. 2001. “Monetary
Policy Strategies for Latin America.” Journal of Development
Economics 66 (2): 415–44.
Mishkin, Frederic S., and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel. 2007. “Does
Inflation Targeting Make a Difference?” NBER Working
Paper 12876, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Neely, Christopher J. 2014. “Lessons from the Taper Tantrum.”
Economic Synopses 2, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
Obstfeld, Maurice. 2014. “Never Say Never: Commentary on a Policymaker’s Reflections.” IMF Economic Review 62 (4): 656–93.
Rogoff, Kenneth. 2004. “Globalization and Global Disinflation.” In “Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER 3

Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize

Changing Economy,” a symposium sponsored by the Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Rogoff, Kenneth, Aasim M. Husain, Ashoka Mody, Robin
Brooks, and Nienke Oomes. 2004. “Evolution and Performance of Exchange Rate Regimes.” IMF Occasional
Paper 229, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Sahay, Ratna, Vivek Arora, Thanos Arvanitis, Hamid Faruqee,
Papa N’Diaye, Tommaso Mancini-Griffoli, and an IMF
Team. 2014. “Emerging Market Volatility: Lessons from the
Taper Tantrum.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 14/09, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. 2007. “Why Has US
Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?” Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking 39 (1): 3–33.
———. 2010. “Modeling Inflation after the Crisis.” Proceedings—
Economic Policy Symposium—Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve Bank
of Kansas City: 173–220.
Taylor, John B. 1993. “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in
Practice.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 39: 95–214.

———. 2000. “Low Inflation, Pass-Through, and the
Pricing Power of Firms.” European Economic Review 44
(7): 1389–408.
Végh, Carlos A., Luis Morano, Diego Friedheim, and Diego
Rojas. 2017. “Between a Rock and a Hard Place: The Monetary Policy Dilemma in Latin America and the Caribbean.”
LAC Semiannual Report; October 2017. Washington, DC:
World Bank. https://​openknowledge​.worldbank​.org/​handle/​
10986/​28443.
Végh, Carlos A., and Guillermo Vuletin. 2014. “Overcoming
the Fear of Free Falling: Monetary Policy Graduation in
Emerging Markets.” In the Role of Central Banks in Financial
Stability: How Has It Changed? edited by Douglas Darrell
Evanoff, Cornelia Holthausen, George G. Kaufman, and
Manfred Kremer. Singapore: World Scientific Publishing.
Woodford, Michael. 2003. “Optimal Interest Rate Smoothing.”
Review of Economic Studies 70: 861–86.
Yellen, Janet L. 2015. “Inflation Dynamics and Monetary
Policy.” The Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

125

This page intentionally left blank

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

T

he Statistical Appendix presents historical data as well as projections. It comprises
seven sections: Assumptions, What’s New,
Data and Conventions, Country Notes,
Classification of Countries, Key Data Documentation,
and Statistical Tables.
The assumptions underlying the estimates and projections for 2018–19 and the medium-term scenario
for 2020–23 are summarized in the first section. The
second section presents a brief description of the
changes to the database and statistical tables since the
April 2018 World Economic Outlook (WEO). The third
section provides a general description of the data and
the conventions used for calculating country group
composites. The fourth section summarizes selected
key information for each country. The fifth section
summarizes the classification of countries in the various groups presented in the WEO. The sixth section
provides information on methods and reporting standards for the member countries’ national account and
government finance indicators included in the report.
The last, and main, section comprises the statistical
tables. (Statistical Appendix A is included here; Statistical Appendix B is available online.) Data in these
tables have been compiled on the basis of information
available through September 18, 2018. The figures
for 2018 and beyond are shown with the same degree
of precision as the historical figures solely for convenience; because they are projections, the same degree
of accuracy is not to be inferred.

Assumptions
Real effective exchange rates for the advanced economies are assumed to remain constant at their average
levels measured during the period July 17 to August
14, 2018. For 2018 and 2019, these assumptions
imply average US dollar–special drawing right (SDR)
conversion rates of 1.419 and 1.406, US dollar–euro
conversion rates of 1.186 and 1.170, and yen–US dollar
conversion rates of 109.8 and 109.3, respectively.
It is assumed that the price of oil will average $69.38 a
barrel in 2018 and $68.76 a barrel in 2019.
Established policies of national authorities are assumed
to be maintained. The more specific policy assumptions

underlying the projections for selected economies are
described in Box A1.
With regard to interest rates, it is assumed that the
London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) on six-month
US dollar deposits will average 2.5 percent in 2018 and
3.4 percent in 2019, that three-month euro deposits will
average –0.3 percent in 2018 and –0.2 percent in 2019,
and that six-month yen deposits will average 0.0 percent
in 2018 and 0.1 percent in 2019.
As a reminder, in regard to the introduction of the
euro, on December 31, 1998, the Council of the European Union decided that, effective January 1, 1999, the
irrevocably fixed conversion rates between the euro and
currencies of the member countries adopting the euro
are as described in Box 5.4 of the October 1998 WEO:
1 euro

=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=

13.7603
40.3399
0.585274
1.95583
15.6466
5.94573
6.55957
340.750
0.787564
1,936.27
0.702804
3.45280
40.3399
0.42930
2.20371
200.482
30.1260
239.640
166.386

Austrian schillings
Belgian francs
Cyprus pound1
Deutsche marks
Estonian krooni2
Finnish markkaa
French francs
Greek drachmas3
Irish pound
Italian lire
Latvian lat4
Lithuanian litas5
Luxembourg francs
Maltese lira1
Netherlands guilders
Portuguese escudos
Slovak koruna6
Slovenian tolars7
Spanish pesetas

1Established

on January 1, 2008.
on January 1, 2011.
3Established on January 1, 2001.
4Established on January 1, 2014.
5Established on January 1, 2015.
6Established on January 1, 2009.
7Established on January 1, 2007.
2Established

See Box 5.4 of the October 1998 WEO for details on
how the conversion rates were established.
International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

127

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

What’s New
•• Argentina’s consumer prices, which were previously
excluded from the group composites because of data constraints, are now included starting from 2017 onward.
•• Data for Aruba are included in the data aggregated for
the emerging market and developing economies.
•• Egypt’s forecast data from which the nominal exchange
rate assumptions are calculated that were previously
excluded because the nominal exchange rate was a
market-sensitive issue, are now made public.
•• Swaziland is now called Eswatini.
•• Venezuela redenominated its currency on August 20,
2018, by replacing 100,000 bolívares Fuertes (VEF)
with 1 bolívar Soberano (VES). Local currency
data, including the historical data, for Venezuela are
expressed in the new currency beginning with the
October 2018 WEO database.

Data and Conventions
Data and projections for 194 economies form the statistical basis of the WEO database. The data are maintained
jointly by the IMF’s Research Department and regional
departments, with the latter regularly updating country
projections based on consistent global assumptions.
Although national statistical agencies are the ultimate
providers of historical data and definitions, international
organizations are also involved in statistical issues, with
the objective of harmonizing methodologies for the compilation of national statistics, including analytical frameworks, concepts, definitions, classifications, and valuation
procedures used in the production of economic statistics.
The WEO database reflects information from both
national source agencies and international organizations.
Most countries’ macroeconomic data presented in the
WEO conform broadly to the 2008 version of the System
of National Accounts (SNA). The IMF’s sector statistical
standards—the sixth edition of the Balance of Payments and
International Investment Position Manual (BPM6), the Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual and Compilation Guide
(MFSMCG), and the Government Finance Statistics Manual
2014 (GFSM 2014)—have been or are being aligned with
the SNA 2008. These standards reflect the IMF’s special
interest in countries’ external positions, financial sector
stability, and public sector fiscal positions. The process
of adapting country data to the new standards begins in
earnest when the manuals are released. However, full concordance with the manuals is ultimately dependent on the
provision by national statistical compilers of revised country
data; hence, the WEO estimates are only partially adapted
to these manuals. Nonetheless, for many countries, the
impact on major balances and aggregates of conversion to
the updated standards will be small. Many other countries
128

have partially adopted the latest standards and will continue
implementation over a period of years.1
The fiscal gross and net debt data reported in the WEO
are drawn from official data sources and IMF staff estimates.
While attempts are made to align gross and net debt data
with the definitions in the GFSM, as a result of data limitations or specific country circumstances, these data can sometimes deviate from the formal definitions. Although every
effort is made to ensure the WEO data are relevant and
internationally comparable, differences in both sectoral and
instrument coverage mean that the data are not universally
comparable. As more information becomes available, changes
in either data sources or instrument coverage can give rise to
data revisions that can sometimes be substantial. For clarification on the deviations in sectoral or instrument coverage,
please refer to the metadata for the online WEO database.
Composite data for country groups in the WEO are either
sums or weighted averages of data for individual countries. Unless noted otherwise, multiyear averages of growth
rates are expressed as compound annual rates of change.2
Arithmetically weighted averages are used for all data for the
emerging market and developing economies group—except
data on inflation and money growth, for which geometric
averages are used. The following conventions apply:
Country group composites for exchange rates, interest rates, and growth rates of monetary aggregates are
weighted by GDP converted to US dollars at market
exchange rates (averaged over the preceding three years)
as a share of group GDP.
Composites for other data relating to the domestic
economy, whether growth rates or ratios, are weighted by
GDP valued at purchasing power parity as a share of total
world or group GDP.3 Annual inflation rates are simple
percentage changes from the previous years, except in the
case of emerging market and developing economies, for
which the rates are based on logarithmic differences.
Composites for real GDP per capita in purchasing power
parity terms are sums of individual country data after conversion to the international dollar in the years indicated.
1 Many countries are implementing the SNA 2008 or European System
of National and Regional Accounts (ESA) 2010, and a few countries use
versions of the SNA older than that from 1993. A similar adoption pattern is expected for the BPM6 and GFSM 2014. Please refer to Table G,
which lists the statistical standards adhered to by each country.
2 Averages for real GDP and its components, employment, inflation,
factor productivity, GDP per capita, trade, and commodity prices are
calculated based on the compound annual rate of change, except in the case
of the unemployment rate, which is based on the simple arithmetic average.
3 See “Revised Purchasing Power Parity Weights” in the July 2014
WEO Update for a summary of the revised purchasing-power-parity-based
weights, as well as Box A2 of the April 2004 WEO and Annex IV of the
May 1993 WEO. See also Anne-Marie Gulde and Marianne SchulzeGhattas, “Purchasing Power Parity Based Weights for the World Economic
Outlook,” in Staff Studies for the World Economic Outlook (Washington,
DC: International Monetary Fund, December 1993), 106–23.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Unless noted otherwise, composites for all sectors for
the euro area are corrected for reporting discrepancies in
intra-area transactions. Unadjusted annual GDP data are
used for the euro area and for the majority of individual
countries, except for Cyprus, Germany, Ireland, and
Portugal, which report calendar adjusted data. For data
prior to 1999, data aggregations apply 1995 European
currency unit exchange rates.
Composites for fiscal data are sums of individual
country data after conversion to US dollars at the average market exchange rates in the years indicated.
Composite unemployment rates and employment growth
are weighted by labor force as a share of group labor force.
Composites relating to external sector statistics are
sums of individual country data after conversion to US
dollars at the average market exchange rates in the years
indicated for balance of payments data and at end-ofyear market exchange rates for debt denominated in
currencies other than US dollars.
Composites of changes in foreign trade volumes and
prices, however, are arithmetic averages of percent changes
for individual countries weighted by the US dollar value
of exports or imports as a share of total world or group
exports or imports (in the preceding year).
Unless noted otherwise, group composites are
computed if 90 percent or more of the share of group
weights is represented.
Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a
few countries that use fiscal years; Table F lists the economies with exceptional reporting periods for national
accounts and government finance data for each country.
For some countries, the figures for 2017 and earlier
are based on estimates rather than actual outturns; Table
G lists the latest actual outturns for the indicators in the
national accounts, prices, government finance, and balance of payments indicators for each country.

Country Notes
The consumer price data for Argentina before December
2013 reflect the consumer price index (CPI) for the Greater
Buenos Aires Area (CPI-GBA), while from December 2013
to October 2015 the data reflect the national CPI (IPCNu).
The government that took office in December 2015 discontinued the IPCNu, stating that it was flawed, and released
a new CPI for the Greater Buenos Aires Area on June 15,
2016 (a new national CPI has been disseminated starting
in June 2017). At its November 9, 2016, meeting, the IMF
Executive Board considered the new CPI series to be in line
with international standards and lifted the declaration of
censure issued in 2013. Given the differences in geographical coverage, weights, sampling, and methodology of these
series, the average CPI inflation for 2014, 2015, and 2016,

and end-of-period inflation for 2015 and 2016 are not
reported in the October 2018 WEO.
Argentina’s authorities discontinued the publication of
labor market data in December 2015 and released new
series starting in the second quarter of 2016.
Greece’s primary balance estimates for 2017 are based
on preliminary excessive deficit procedure data on an
accrual basis (ESA 2010) provided by the National
Statistical Service as of April 23, 2018. Historical data
since 2010 reflect adjustments in line with the primary
balance definition under the enhanced surveillance procedure for Greece.
India’s real GDP growth rates are calculated as per
national accounts: for 1998 to 2011, with base year
2004/05; thereafter, with base year 2011/12.
Against the background of a civil war and weak
capacities, the reliability of Libya’s data, especially
medium-term projections, is low.
Data for Syria are excluded from 2011 onward
because of the uncertain political situation.
Data and projections for Turkey represent information
available as of September 11, 2018.
Projecting the economic outlook in Venezuela, including assessing past and current economic developments as
the basis for the projections, is complicated by the lack
of discussions with the authorities (the last Article IV
consultation took place in 2004), long intervals in receiving data with information gaps, incomplete provision of
information, and difficulties in interpreting certain reported
economic indicators given economic developments. The fiscal accounts include the budgetary central government and
Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PDVSA), and data for 2016–
23 are IMF staff estimates. Revenue includes the IMF
staff’s estimate of foreign exchange profits transferred from
the central bank to the government (buying US dollars at
the most appreciated rate and selling at more depreciated
rates in a multitier exchange rate system) and excludes IMF
staff’s estimate of revenue from PDVSA’s sale of PetroCaribe assets to the central bank. The effects of hyperinflation
and the noted data gaps mean that IMF staff’s projected
macroeconomic indicators need to be interpreted with
caution. For example, nominal GDP is estimated assuming
the GDP deflator rises in line with IMF staff’s projection
of average inflation. Public external debt in relation to
GDP is projected using IMF staff’s estimate of the average
exchange rate for the year. Fiscal accounts for 2010–23 correspond to the budgetary central government and PDVSA.
Fiscal accounts before 2010 correspond to the budgetary
central government, public enterprises (including PDVSA),
Instituto Venezolano de los Seguros Sociales (IVSS - social
security), and Fondo de Garantía de Depósitos y Protección
Bancaria (FOGADE - deposit insurance).
International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

129

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Venezuela’s consumer prices (CPI) are excluded from
all WEO group composites.

Classification of Countries
Summary of the Country Classification
The country classification in the WEO divides the
world into two major groups: advanced economies
and emerging market and developing economies.4 This
classification is not based on strict criteria, economic
or otherwise, and it has evolved over time. The objective is to facilitate analysis by providing a reasonably
meaningful method of organizing data. Table A provides an overview of the country classification, showing
the number of countries in each group by region and
summarizing some key indicators of their relative size
(GDP valued at purchasing power parity, total exports
of goods and services, and population).
Some countries remain outside the country classification and therefore are not included in the analysis. Cuba
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are
examples of countries that are not IMF members, and
their economies therefore are not monitored by the IMF.

General Features and Composition of Groups in
the World Economic Outlook Classification
Advanced Economies
The 39 advanced economies are listed in Table B.
The seven largest in terms of GDP based on market
exchange rates—the United States, Japan, Germany,
France, Italy, the United Kingdom, and Canada—constitute the subgroup of major advanced economies;
often referred to as the Group of Seven (G7). The
members of the euro area are also distinguished as a
subgroup. Composite data shown in the tables for the
euro area cover the current members for all years, even
though the membership has increased over time.
Table C lists the member countries of the European
Union, not all of which are classified as advanced
economies in the WEO.

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
The group of emerging market and developing economies (155) includes all those that are not classified as
advanced economies.
The regional breakdowns of emerging market and
developing economies are Commonwealth of Independent
4 As used here, the terms “country” and “economy” do not always refer
to a territorial entity that is a state as understood by international law and
practice. Some territorial entities included here are not states, although
their statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.

130

States (CIS); emerging and developing Asia; emerging and
developing Europe (sometimes also referred to as “central
and eastern Europe”); Latin America and the Caribbean
(LAC); the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan (MENAP); and sub-Saharan Africa (SSA).
Emerging market and developing economies are also
classified according to analytical criteria. The analytical
criteria reflect the composition of export earnings and a
distinction between net creditor and net debtor economies. The detailed composition of emerging market
and developing economies in the regional and analytical
groups is shown in Tables D and E.
The analytical criterion source of export earnings distinguishes between the categories fuel (Standard International
Trade Classification [SITC] 3) and nonfuel and then
focuses on nonfuel primary products (SITCs 0, 1, 2, 4, and
68). Economies are categorized into one of these groups
when their main source of export earnings exceeded 50 percent of total exports on average between 2013 and 2017.5
The financial criteria focus on net creditor economies,
net debtor economies, heavily indebted poor countries
(HIPCs), and low-income developing countries (LIDCs).
Economies are categorized as net debtors when their latest
net international investment position, where available, was
less than zero or their current account balance accumulations from 1972 (or earliest available data) to 2017 were
negative. Net debtor economies are further differentiated
on the basis of experience with debt servicing.
The HIPC group comprises the countries that are or
have been considered by the IMF and the World Bank
for participation in their debt initiative known as the
HIPC Initiative, which aims to reduce the external debt
burdens of all the eligible HIPCs to a “sustainable” level
in a reasonably short period of time.6 Many of these
countries have already benefited from debt relief and
have graduated from the initiative.
The LIDCs are countries that have per capita income
levels below a certain threshold (set at $2,700 in 2016 as
measured by the World Bank’s Atlas method), structural
features consistent with limited development and structural
transformation, and insufficiently close external financial
linkages to be widely seen as emerging market economies.

5 During 2013–17, 26 economies incurred external payments
arrears or entered into official or commercial bank debt-rescheduling
agreements. This group is referred to as economies with arrears and/or
rescheduling during 2013–17.
6 See David Andrews, Anthony R. Boote, Syed S. Rizavi, and
Sukwinder Singh, “Debt Relief for Low-Income Countries: The
Enhanced HIPC Initiative,” IMF Pamphlet Series 51 (Washington,
DC: International Monetary Fund, November 1999).

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods
and Services, and Population, 20171
(Percent of total for group or world)

Number of
Economies
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Russia
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India
Excluding China and India
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan
Middle East and North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Excluding Nigeria and South Africa
Analytical Groups3
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by DebtServicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling
during 2012–16
Other Groups
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Low-Income Developing Countries

39
19

16
7

GDP
Advanced
Economies

World

100.0
37.0
28.1
8.0
5.4
4.4
3.4
10.3
5.5
3.4
15.7

41.3
15.3
11.6
3.3
2.2
1.8
1.4
4.3
2.3
1.4
6.5

74.0

30.6

Exports of Goods
and Services
Advanced
Economies
World
100.0
16.3
41.4
12.1
5.7
4.2
3.1
6.1
5.5
3.5
27.2

63.6
10.4
26.3
7.7
3.7
2.7
2.0
3.9
3.5
2.2
17.3

53.4

Population
Advanced
Economies
World
100.0
30.6
31.8
7.8
6.1
5.7
4.4
11.9
6.2
3.4
16.0

14.4
4.4
4.6
1.1
0.9
0.8
0.6
1.7
0.9
0.5
2.3

33.9

71.7

10.3

World

Emerging
Market and
Developing
Economies

World

Emerging
Market and
Developing
Economies

World

58.7

100.0

36.4

100.0

85.6

7.6
5.4
55.2
31.0
12.7
11.5
6.1
13.1
4.3
3.3

4.5
3.2
32.4
18.2
7.4
6.7
3.6
7.7
2.5
1.9

7.5
5.0
49.5
29.3
6.1
14.1
9.9
14.1
3.0
5.3

2.7
1.8
18.0
10.7
2.2
5.1
3.6
5.1
1.1
1.9

4.5
2.3
56.6
22.0
20.9
13.7
2.8
9.8
3.3
2.0

3.9
2.0
48.4
18.8
17.8
11.8
2.4
8.4
2.8
1.7

23
21
45
43

12.8
11.3
5.1
2.6

7.5
6.6
3.0
1.5

14.6
14.3
4.4
2.6

5.3
5.2
1.6
0.9

10.9
7.2
15.3
11.5

9.3
6.2
13.1
9.8

28
126
32

17.9
82.1
5.0

10.5
48.2
3.0

20.9
79.1
5.3

7.6
28.8
1.9

11.7
88.3
8.4

10.1
75.5
7.2

123

49.7

29.1

45.9

16.7

66.9

57.3

26

3.5

2.1

2.4

0.9

6.4

5.5

39
59

2.5
7.2

1.4
4.2

2.0
6.8

0.7
2.5

11.5
22.7

9.8
19.4

Emerging
Market and
Developing
Economies
155

100.0

12
30

28
12
33

1The GDP shares are based on the purchasing-power-parity valuation of economies’ GDP. The number of economies comprising each group reflects those
for which data are included in the group aggregates.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure.
3Syria is omitted from the source of export earnings and South Sudan and Syria are omitted from the net external position group composites because of
insufficient data.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

131

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup
Major Currency Areas
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Euro Area
Austria
Belgium
Cyprus
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany

Greece
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta

Netherlands
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Spain

Major Advanced Economies
Canada
France
Germany

Italy
Japan
United Kingdom

United States

Other Advanced Economies
Australia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Hong Kong SAR1
Iceland
Israel

Korea
Macao SAR2
New Zealand
Norway
Puerto Rico
San Marino

Singapore
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan Province of China

1On

July 1, 1997, Hong Kong was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a Special
Administrative Region of China.
2On December 20, 1999, Macao was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a
Special Administrative Region of China.

Table C. European Union
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France

132

Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Netherlands

Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source of Export Earnings
Fuel

Nonfuel Primary Products

Azerbaijan
Kazakhstan
Russia
Turkmenistan1

Uzbekistan

Brunei Darussalam
Timor-Leste

Kiribati
Lao P.D.R.
Marshall Islands
Mongolia
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Tuvalu

Bolivia
Ecuador
Trinidad and Tobago
Venezuela

Argentina
Chile
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay

Algeria
Bahrain
Iran
Iraq
Kuwait
Libya
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen

Afghanistan
Mauritania
Sudan

Angola
Chad
Republic of Congo
Equatorial Guinea
Gabon
Nigeria
South Sudan

Burkina Faso
Burundi
Central African Republic
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Eritrea
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Liberia
Malawi
Mali
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Zambia

Commonwealth of Independent States

Emerging and Developing Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean

Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan

Sub-Saharan Africa

1Turkmenistan,

which is not a member of the Commonwealth of Independent States, is included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in
economic structure.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

133

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, and Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
and Low-Income Developing Countries
Net External
Position1

Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries2

Low-Income
Developing
Countries
Albania

*
•
*
*
*
*
*
•
*
*
*
•

Azerbaijan
Belarus
Georgia3
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyz Republic
Moldova
Russia
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan3
Ukraine3
Uzbekistan

Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Hungary

*
*

Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
Fiji
India
Indonesia
Kiribati
Lao P.D.R.
Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nauru
Nepal
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vietnam

Kosovo
FYR Macedonia
Montenegro

*

Poland
Romania
Serbia

*

Turkey

*
*
•
*
•
*
*
*
•
*
*
*
*
•
*
*
*
•
•
*
*
*
*
*
•
•
*
*
*
*

*
*
*

Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

*

The Bahamas

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil

*
*

Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador

*
*
*

El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica

*

Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama

*

Paraguay
Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia

*

St. Vincent and the
Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

*
•

Aruba

Suriname

134

Low-Income
Developing
Countries

Latin America and the Caribbean

Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh

Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries2

Emerging and Developing Europe

Commonwealth of Independent States
Armenia

Net External
Position1

Venezuela

*
*
•
*
•

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

•

•

•
•

*
*

•

*

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, and Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
and Low-Income Developing Countries (continued)
Net External
Position1

Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries2

Low-Income
Developing
Countries

Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Afghanistan
Algeria
Bahrain
Djibouti
Egypt
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Sudan
Syria4
Tunisia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen

•
•
•
*
*
•
•
*
•
*
•
*
*
•
*
•
•
*
*
...
*
•
*

•

*

Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros

*
*
•
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

Republic of Congo
Côte d’Ivoire

*

Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea

•

*

Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi

*
*

*
*

Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger

*

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola

Democratic Republic of
the Congo

Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe

•

*

•
•

*
*

•
•
•
•

*
*
*
*

Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
South Sudan4
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Net External
Position1

Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries2

Low-Income
Developing
Countries

*
*
*
*
*
•
*
•
•
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
•
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
...
*
*
*
*

•
•
•

*
*
*

*

*

•

*

•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

•

*

•

*
*
*
*
*

•
•
•
•

*
*
*
*
*
*

•
•
•
•

*

*

1Dot

(star) indicates that the country is a net creditor (net debtor).
instead of star indicates that the country has reached the completion point, which allows it to receive the full debt relief committed to at the decision point.
3Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in
economic structure.
4South Sudan and Syria are omitted from the net external position group composite for lack of a fully developed database.
2Dot

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

135

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods1
National Accounts
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bhutan
Jul/Jun
Botswana
Dominica
Egypt
Jul/Jun
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Jul/Jun
Haiti
Oct/Sep
Hong Kong SAR
India
Apr/Mar
Iran
Apr/Mar
Jamaica
Lesotho
Apr/Mar
Malawi
Marshall Islands
Oct/Sep
Mauritius
Micronesia
Oct/Sep
Myanmar
Oct/Sep
Nauru
Jul/Jun
Nepal
Aug/Jul
Pakistan
Jul/Jun
Palau
Oct/Sep
Puerto Rico
Jul/Jun
St. Lucia
Samoa
Jul/Jun
Singapore
Thailand
Trinidad and Tobago
1Unless noted otherwise, all data refer to calendar years.

136

Government Finance
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Jul/Jun
Aug/Jul
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation
National Accounts

Country
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and
Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Aruba
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
The Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and
Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African
Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Costa Rica

Currency
Afghan afghani
Albanian lek
Algerian dinar
Angolan kwanza
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Argentine peso
Armenian dram
Aruban florin
Australian dollar
Euro
Azerbaijan manat
Bahamian dollar
Bahrain dinar
Bangladesh taka
Barbados dollar
Belarusian ruble
Euro
Belize dollar
CFA franc
Bhutanese
ngultrum
Bolivian boliviano
Bosnia convertible
marka
Botswana pula
Brazilian real
Brunei dollar
Bulgarian lev
CFA franc
Burundi franc

Prices (CPI)

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2016
2016
2017
2015
2016

Base Year2
2002/03
1996
2001
2002
20066

System of
National
Accounts
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 1995
SNA 1993

2017
2016
2017
2017
2017
2016
2016
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016
2015
2015/16

2004
2005
2000
2015/16
2010
2005
2012
2010
2005/06
2010
2014
2015
2000
2007
2000/016

SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO

2016
2017

1990
2010

SNA 2008
ESA 2010

NSO
NSO
NSO and GAD
NSO
NSO and MEP
NSO

2017
2017
2017
2017
2016
2015

2006
1995
2010
2010
1999
2005

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
IMF staff
NSO
NSO and MEP
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO and CB
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO

Cabo Verdean
escudo
Cambodian riel
CFA franc
Canadian dollar
CFA franc

NSO

2017

2007

SNA 2008

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2017
2016
2017
2012

2000
2005
2007
2005

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 1993

CFA franc
Chilean peso
Chinese yuan
Colombian peso
Comorian franc
Congolese franc

CB
CB
NSO
NSO
MEP
NSO

2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016

2005
20136
2015
2015
2000
2005

…
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
…
SNA 1993

CFA franc
Costa Rican colón

NSO
CB

2016
2016

1990
2012

SNA 1993
SNA 2008

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3
From 1996
From 2005

From 2000
From 1980
From 1995
From 1994

From 2005
From 1995

From 2000

From 1996

From 2011

From 1980

From 2003
From 2000

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
CB

2017
2016
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016
2017
2016/17

NSO
NSO

2017
2017

NSO
NSO
NSO and GAD
NSO
NSO
NSO

2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017

NSO

2017

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2017
2017
2017
2015

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB

2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016

NSO
CB

2017
2016

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

Latest
Actual
Annual Data
2017
2017
2017
2015
2016

137

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2017
2016

Statistics
Manual in
Use at Source
2001
1986

MoF
MoF
MoF

2017
2016
2016

1986
2001
2001

MEP
MoF
MoF
MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
CB
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

2017
2016
2017
2016
2017
2015
2016/17
2016
2017
2016/17
2017
2017
2016/17
2017
2016/17
2016

1986
2001
2001
2014
2001
…
2001
2001
…
1986
2001
ESA 2010
1986
1986
1986
2001

Bosnia and
Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil

MoF

2017

2001

MoF
MoF

2017/18
2017

1986
2001

Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African
Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Costa Rica

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

2017
2017
2017
2015
2017
2016
2016
2017
2016

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF and CB

Country
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and
Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Aruba
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
The Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia

138

Historical Data
Source1
MoF
IMF staff

Balance of Payments

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2017
2016

Statistics
Manual
in Use at
Source
BPM 5
BPM 6

CB
CB
CB

2017
2016
2016

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6

C
C
Mixed
A
A
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
Mixed
C
C
C

NSO
CB
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB

2017
2016
2017
2017
2017
2016
2017
2017
2017
2016
2017
2017
2016
2016
2015/16
2016

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6

Mixed

CB

2017

BPM 6

C
C

CB
CB

2017
2017

BPM 6
BPM 6

C
C
CB
A
A
A
C
A
C

NSO, MEP, and GAD
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
MoF
NSO
CB

2017
2017
2016
2016
2017
2017
2016
2017
2015

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5

CG,NFPC
CG,LG
CG,LG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG

C
A
C
…
Mixed
A

CB
CB
GAD
CB and NSO
CB and IMF staff
CB

2015
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5

CG
CG

A
C

CB
CB

2016
2016

BPM 6
BPM 6

Subsectors
Coverage4

Accounting
Practice5
C
…

Historical Data
Source1
NSO, MoF, and CB
CB

C
…
C

CG,SG,SS
CG
CG
CG,SG,LG,TG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG
CG
BCG
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG,MPC
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS,NMPC,
NFPC
CG,SG,LG,SS

…
2001
2001
2001
2001
1986
2001
2001
2001

CG
CG,SG,LG,SS,
MPC,NFPC
CG, BCG
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG
CG,LG
CG,NFPC
CG,SG,LG,SS,Other
CG

2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016

1986
2001
…
2001
1986
2001

2017
2016

2001
1986

CG
CG,LG,SS,MPC,
NFPC
CG
CG,LG
CG

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts

Country
Côte d'Ivoire
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2015
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016

Year2

System of
National
Accounts
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia

Currency
CFA franc
Croatian kuna
Euro
Czech koruna
Danish krone
Djibouti franc
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Dominican peso
US dollar
Egyptian pound
US dollar
CFA franc
Eritrean nakfa
Euro

CB
CB
MEP
CB
MEP and CB
IMF staff
NSO

2017
2016
2016/17
2017
2016
2006
2017

2007
2007
2011/12
2005
2006
2005
2010

SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010

Eswatini
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
The Gambia
Georgia

Swazi lilangeni
Ethiopian birr
Fijian dollar
Euro
Euro
CFA franc
Gambian dalasi
Georgian lari

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
MoF
NSO
NSO

2016
2016/17
2016
2017
2017
2016
2017
2016

2011
2015/16
20116
2010
2014
2001
2013
2000

SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2017
2017
2017
2017

2010
2006
2010
2006

ESA 2010
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993

CB

2017

2001

SNA 1993

Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong SAR
Hungary
Iceland

Euro
Ghanaian cedi
Euro
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Guatemalan
quetzal
Guinean franc
CFA franc
Guyanese dollar
Haitian gourde
Honduran lempira
Hong Kong dollar
Hungarian forint
Icelandic króna

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO

2016
2016
2017
2016/17
2016
2017
2017
2017

2010
2005
20066
1986/87
2000
2016
2005
2005

SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
ESA 2010

India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica

Indian rupee
Indonesian rupiah
Iranian rial
Iraqi dinar
Euro
New Israeli shekel
Euro
Jamaican dollar

NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2017/18
2017
2016/17
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016

2011/12
2010
2011/12
2007
2015
2015
2010
2007

SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1968/93
ESA 2010
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
SNA 1993

Guatemala

Base
2009
2010
2005
2010
2010
1990
2006

Prices (CPI)
Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3

From 1995
From 1995
From 1980

From 2007

From 2010

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO and CB
NSO
NSO
MEP
NSO
NSO

Latest
Actual
Annual Data
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016
2017
2017
2017/18
2017
2017
2009
2017

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2017
2017
2017
2017

From 2001

NSO

2017

From 1980
From 2005
From 1990

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
IEO
NSO

2017
2017
2017
2016/17
2016
2017
2017
2017

NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2017/18
2017
2016/17
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016

From 1980
From 1980

From 1996
From 1991
From 1995

From 1995
From 1995
From 1980

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

139

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance

Country
Côte d'Ivoire
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
The Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong SAR
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica

140

Historical Data
Source1
MoF
MoF
NSO
MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
CB and MoF
MoF
MoF and CB
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
NSO
IMF staff
MoF
MoF
NSO
MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
CB and MoF
NSO
MEP and NSO
NSO
MoF and IMF staff
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF and NSO
MoF and NSO
NSO
MoF

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2017
2017
2017
2016
2017
2016
2016/17
2017
2016
2016/17
2017
2016
2008
2017
2017/18
2015/16
2017
2016
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016/17
2017
2017/18
2017
2017
2017/18
2017
2016/17
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016/17

Statistics
Manual in
Use at Source
1986
2001
ESA 2010
2001
2001
2001
1986
2001
1986
2001
1986
1986
2001
1986/2001
2001
1986
1986
2001
2001
2001
1986
2001
2001
2001
2014
2001
2001
2001
2001
1986
2001
2014
2001
ESA 2010
2001
1986
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
1986

Balance of Payments

Subsectors
Coverage4
CG
CG,LG
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG,SG,LG,SS, NMPC
CG,SG,LG,SS, NFPC
CG,LG,SS,MPC
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,SG,LG,NFPC
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG,LG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG
CG
CG,SS,NFPC
CG
CG,LG,SS,Other
CG
CG,LG,SS,NMPC
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG
CG,LG
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG

Accounting
Practice5
A
A
A
A
A
A
C
Mixed
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
C
C
A
A
A
C
C
A
C
A
CB
C
C
A
C
C
Mixed
C
A
A
C
C
C
C
A
…
A
C

Historical Data
Source1
CB
CB
CB
NSO
NSO
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB and IMF staff
NSO and CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB and MEP
CB
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2016
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016
2016
2017
2016
2016/17
2017
2016
2008
2017
2017
2016/17
2017
2017
2017
2016
2017
2016
2017
2017
2017
2016
2017
2017
2016
2017
2016/17
2015
2017
2017
2017
2017/18
2017
2016/17
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016

Statistics
Manual
in Use at
Source
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts

Country
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea
Kosovo
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao P.D.R.
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macao SAR
FYR Macedonia
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia
Moldova
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nauru
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway

Currency
Japanese yen
Jordanian dinar
Kazakhstani tenge
Kenya shilling
Australian dollar
South Korean won
Euro
Kuwaiti dinar
Kyrgyz som
Lao kip
Euro
Lebanese pound
Lesotho loti
US dollar
Libyan dinar
Euro
Euro
Macanese pataca
Macedonian denar
Malagasy ariary
Malawian kwacha
Malaysian ringgit
Maldivian rufiyaa
CFA franc
Euro
US dollar
Mauritanian
ouguiya
Mauritian rupee
Mexican peso
US dollar
Moldovan leu
Mongolian tögrög
Euro
Moroccan dirham
Mozambican
metical
Myanmar kyat
Namibia dollar
Australian dollar
Nepalese rupee
Euro
New Zealand dollar
Nicaraguan
córdoba
CFA franc
Nigerian naira
Norwegian krone

Historical Data
Source1
GAD
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
MEP and NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
MoF and NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

Prices (CPI)
System of
National
Accounts
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
SNA 1968
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3
From 1980

From 1999

2010/11
2000
2006/07
2000/01
2015
2009/10
2006

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993/
2008
…
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 2008
SNA 1993

2000
2010
2015

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
ESA 2010

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2017
2017
2017
2016
2016
2017
2017
2017
2016
2016
2017
2016
2015/16
2017
2016
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016
2011
2017
2017
2016
2017
2016/17
2014

Base
2011
1994
2007
2009
2006
2010
2016
2010
2005
2012
2010
2010
2012/13
1992
2003
2010
2010
2016
2005
2000
2010
2010
2014
1999
2010
2003/04
2004

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2017
2017
2014/15
2017
2016
2016
2016
2017

2006
2013
2004
1995
2010
2006
2007
2009

MEP
NSO
…
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB

2016/17
2017
2015/16
2017/18
2017
2017
2017

NSO
NSO
NSO

2016
2017
2017

Year2

From 1994

From 1980

From 1995
From 2010

From 2005
From 1995
From 2001

From 2000

Historical Data
Source1
GAD
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO and MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

Latest
Actual
Annual Data
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016
2016
2017
2016/17
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016/17
2017

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2017
2017
2014/15
2017
2016/17
2016
2017
2017

From 1980
From 1987
From 1994

NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
CB

2017/18
2017
2016/17
2017/18
2017
2017
2017

From 1980

NSO
NSO
NSO

2017
2017
2017

From 1998

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

141

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance

Country
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea
Kosovo
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao P.D.R.
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macao SAR
FYR Macedonia
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia
Moldova
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nauru
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway

142

Historical Data
Source1
GAD
MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MEP
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
NSO and MoF

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2016
2017
2017
2017
2016
2017
2017
2016
2017
2016
2017
2017
2016/17
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016
2017
2017
2017/18
2016
2017
2016
2017
2016/17
2017
2017/18
2017
2014/15
2016
2016
2016
2017
2017
2016/17
2017
2016/17
2017/18
2017
2016/17
2017
2017
2017
2016

Statistics
Manual in
Use at Source
2014
2001
2001
2001
1986
2001
…
1986
…
2001
1986
2001
2001
2001
1986
2014
2001
2014
1986
1986
1986
2001
1986
2001
2001
2001
1986
2001
2014
2001
1986
2001
1986
2001
2001
…
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
1986
1986
2001
2014

Subsectors
Coverage4
CG,LG,SS
CG,NFPC
CG,LG
CG
CG,LG
CG,SS
CG,LG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG
CG
CG,SG,LG
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG,SS
CG,SG,SS
CG,LG
CG
CG,SG,LG
CG
CG
CG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG,NFPC
CG,SS,NMPC,NFPC
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,SG
CG,NFPC
CG
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,SG,LG
CG,LG,SS

Balance of Payments

Accounting
Practice5
A
C
A
A
C
C
C
Mixed
C
C
C
Mixed
C
A
C
A
A
C
C
C
C
C
C
Mixed
A
A
C
C
C
…
C
C
C
A
Mixed
C
C
Mixed
C
A
A
C
A
C
A

Historical Data
Source1
MoF
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB and IMF staff
CB
CB
CB
CB
NSO
NSO
CB
CB
NSO and GAD
NSO
CB
CB
NSO
NSO
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB
GAD
CB
IMF staff
CB
IMF staff
CB
CB
NSO
IMF staff
CB
CB
NSO

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016
2017
2015
2016/17
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016
2017
2016/17
2016
2017
2016
2014/15
2016
2016
2016
2017
2017
2016/17
2017
2014/15
2017/18
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017

Statistics
Manual
in Use at
Source
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts

Country
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Qatar
Romania
Russia
Rwanda
Samoa
San Marino
São Tomé and
Príncipe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Spain
Sri Lanka
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the
Grenadines
Sudan
Suriname

Currency
Omani rial
Pakistan rupee
US dollar
US dollar
Papua New Guinea
kina
Paraguayan
guaraní
Peruvian nuevo sol
Philippine peso
Polish zloty
Euro
US dollar
Qatari riyal
Romanian leu
Russian ruble
Rwandan franc
Samoa tala
Euro
São Tomé and
Príncipe dobra
Saudi riyal
CFA franc
Serbian dinar
Seychellois rupee
Sierra Leonean
leone
Singapore dollar
Euro
Euro
Solomon Islands
dollar
US dollar
South African rand
South Sudanese
pound
Euro
Sri Lankan rupee
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Sudanese pound
Surinamese dollar

Prices (CPI)

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2017
2016/17
2016/17
2017
2015

Base Year2
2010
2005/066
2014/15
2007
2013

System of
National
Accounts
SNA 1993
…
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

2017

2014

SNA 2008

CB

CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO and MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2017
2017
2017
2017
2016/17
2016
2017
2017
2017
2016/17
2016
2016

2007
2000
2010
2011
1954
2013
2010
2016
2014
2009/10
2007
2008

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA1968
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
…
SNA 1993

CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO and MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2017
2017
2017
2017
2016/17
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016/17
2017
2017

NSO and MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2017
2017
2016
2016
2017

2010
2014
2010
2006
2006

SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

NSO and MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2017
2017
2016
2016
2017

NSO
NSO
NSO
CB

2017
2017
2017
2016

2010
2010
2010
2004

SNA 2008
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2017
2017
2017
2017

CB
NSO
NSO

2016
2017
2017

2012
2010
2010

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993

CB
NSO
NSO

2014
2017
2017

NSO
NSO
NSO

2017
2017
2017

2010
2010
20066

ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO
NSO

2017
2017
2017

NSO

2017

2006

SNA 1993

NSO

2017

NSO

2017

20066

SNA 1993

NSO

2017

NSO
NSO

2014
2016

1982
2007

SNA 1968
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO

2017
2017

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
MoF
NSO
NSO and MoF
CB

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3

From 2007

From 1995
From 1980

From 2000
From 1995

From 2010
From 2010

From 1997
From 2000

From 1995

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
MoF
NSO
NSO

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

Latest
Actual
Annual Data
2017
2016/17
2016/17
2017
2015
2017

143

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance

Country
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Qatar
Romania
Russia
Rwanda
Samoa
San Marino
São Tomé and
Príncipe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Spain
Sri Lanka
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the
Grenadines
Sudan
Suriname

144

Historical Data
Source1
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2017
2016/17
2016/17
2017
2015
2017

Statistics
Manual in
Use at Source
2001
1986
2001
1986
1986
2001

MoF
MoF
MoF and NSO
NSO
MEP
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF and Customs

2017
2017
2016
2017
2015/16
2017
2017
2017
2016
2016/17
2016
2016

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF and MEP
MoF and NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

Balance of Payments

Subsectors
Coverage4

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2017
2016/17
2016/17
2017
2015
2017

Statistics
Manual
in Use at
Source
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6

2017
2017
2016
2017
…
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016/17
…
2016

BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
…
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
…
BPM 6

CB
CB and IMF staff
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB
MoF, NSO, and MEP
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB

2017
2017
2016
2016
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016
2016
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016
2016
2016

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6

CB
CB

2017
2017

BPM 6
BPM 5

CB
CB
MoF
NSO
CB
CB

1986
2001
ESA 2010
2001
2001
1986
2001
2001
1986
2001
…
2001

CG
CG,SG,LG
CG
CG,SG,LG,SS, NFPC
CG
CG,SG,LG,SS,MPC,
NFPC
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
…
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG,SS
CG,LG
CG
CG
CG

Accounting
Practice5
C
C
…
C
C
C

Historical Data
Source1

C
C
A
A
A
C
C
Mixed
Mixed
A
…
C

CB
CB
CB
CB
…
CB and IMF staff
CB
CB
CB
CB
…
CB

2017
2017
2016
2017
2017
2016/17
2017
2017
2016
2016
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017/18
2016

2014
2001
1986/2001
1986
1986
2001
2001
1986
1986
2001
2001
…
ESA 2010
2001
1986
1986
1986

CG
CG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG,SS
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG,SG,SS
CG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG, SG
CG
CG

C
C
C
C
C
C
A
C
C
C
C
C
A
C
C
C
C

2017
2017

2001
1986

CG
CG

Mixed
Mixed

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts

Country
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Taiwan Province of
China
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago

Currency
Swedish krona
Swiss franc
Syrian pound
New Taiwan dollar

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

Prices (CPI)

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2017
2017
2010
2017

Base Year2
2017
2010
2000
2011

System of
National
Accounts
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 2008

Tajik somoni
Tanzania shilling
Thai baht
US dollar
CFA franc
Tongan pa’anga
Trinidad and
Tobago dollar
Tunisian dinar
Turkish lira
New Turkmen
manat
Australian dollar
Ugandan shilling
Ukrainian hryvnia
U.A.E. dirham

NSO
NSO
MEP
MoF
NSO
CB
NSO

2017
2016
2017
2016
2015
2017
2017

1995
2007
2002
20156
2007
2010
2012

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO
NSO

2017
2017
2017

2010
2009
2008

SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993

PFTAC advisors
NSO
NSO
NSO

2015
2016
2017
2017

2005
2010
2010
2010

SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 2008

NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
CB

2017
2017
2017
2017
2016
2016

2016
2012
2005
1995
2006
1997

ESA 2010
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008

Vietnam
Yemen

Pound sterling
US dollar
Uruguayan peso
Uzbek sum
Vanuatu vatu
Venezuelan bolívar
fuerte
Vietnamese dong
Yemeni rial

NSO
IMF staff

2017
2008

2010
1990

SNA 1993
SNA 1993

Zambia
Zimbabwe

Zambian kwacha
US dollar

NSO
NSO

2017
2015

2010
2009

SNA 2008
…

Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab
Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3
From 1993
From 1980

From 1993

From 2009
From 2009
From 2000

From 2005

From 1980
From 1980

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
MEP
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO

2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2017

NSO
NSO
NSO

2016
2017
2017

NSO
CB
NSO
NSO

2017
2016/17
2017
2017

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB

2017
2017
2017
2017
2017
2016

NSO
NSO,CB, and
IMF staff
NSO
NSO

2017
2009

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

Latest
Actual
Annual Data
2017
2017
2011
2017

2017
2016

145

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance

Country
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Taiwan Province of
China
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab
Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Vietnam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Balance of Payments

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2016
2016
2009
2017

Statistics
Manual in
Use at Source
2001
2001
1986
2001

Subsectors
Coverage4
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG,SS

Accounting
Practice5
A
A
C
C

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
CB
CB
CB

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2017
2017
2009
2017

Statistics
Manual
in Use at
Source
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

2017
2016
2016/17
2017
2017
2017
2016/17
2016
2017
2017
2017
2016
2016
2017

1986
1986
2001
2001
2001
2014
1986
1986
2001
1986
…
2001
2001
2001

CG,LG,SS
CG,LG
CG,BCG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG
CG
CG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG,BCG,SG,SS

C
C
A
C
C
C
C
C
A
C
Mixed
C
C
C

CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB and NSO
CB and NSO
CB
CB
NSO and IMF staff
IMF staff
CB
CB
CB

2016
2016
2017
2017
2016
2017
2017
2016
2017
2015
2012
2016
2016
2017

BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5

NSO
MEP
MoF

2017
2017
2017

2001
2014
1986

A
A
C

NSO
NSO
CB

2017
2016
2017

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

2016
2017
2013
2015
2013
2017
2015

…
2001
2001
2001
2001
1986
1986

CG,LG
CG,SG,LG
CG,LG,SS,MPC,
NFPC
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
BCG,NFPC
CG,SG,LG
CG,LG
CG
CG

C
C
C
C
C
C
C

MEP
CB
CB
CB
IMF staff
CB
CB and MoF

2017
2017
2016
2017
2009
2017
2016

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6

Historical Data
Source1
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

Note: BPM = Balance of Payments Manual; CPI = consumer price index; ESA = European System of National Accounts; SNA = System of National Accounts.
1CB = central bank; Customs = Customs Authority; GAD = General Administration Department; IEO = international economic organization; MEP = Ministry of Economy, Planning, Commerce, and/or Development; MoF = Ministry of Finance and/or Treasury; NSO = National Statistics Office; PFTAC = Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre.
2National accounts base year is the period with which other periods are compared and the period for which prices appear in the denominators of the price relationships used to
calculate the index.
3Use of chain-weighted methodology allows countries to measure GDP growth more accurately by reducing or eliminating the downward biases in volume series built on index numbers
that average volume components using weights from a year in the moderately distant past.
4BCG = budgetary central government; CG = central government; EUA = extrabudgetary units/accounts; LG = local government; MPC = monetary public corporation, including central
bank; NFPC = nonfinancial public corporation; NMPC = nonmonetary financial public corporation; SG = state government; SS = social security fund; TG = territorial governments.
5Accounting standard: A = accrual accounting; C = cash accounting; CB = commitments basis accounting; Mixed = combination of accrual and cash accounting.
6Base year is not equal to 100 because the nominal GDP is not measured in the same way as real GDP or the data are seasonally adjusted.

146

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions Underlying the Projections for Selected Economies
Fiscal Policy Assumptions
The short-term fiscal policy assumptions used in
the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are normally
based on officially announced budgets, adjusted for
differences between the national authorities and the
IMF staff regarding macroeconomic assumptions and
projected fiscal outturns. When no official budget has
been announced, projections incorporate policy measures that are judged likely to be implemented. The
medium-term fiscal projections are similarly based on
a judgment about the most likely path of policies. For
cases in which the IMF staff has insufficient information to assess the authorities’ budget intentions and
prospects for policy implementation, an unchanged
structural primary balance is assumed unless indicated
otherwise. Specific assumptions used in regard to some
of the advanced economies follow. (See also Tables B5
to B9 in the online section of the Statistical Appendix
for data on fiscal net lending/borrowing and structural
balances.)1
Argentina: Fiscal projections are based on the available information regarding budget outturn and budget
plans for the federal and provincial governments, fiscal
measures announced by the authorities, and the IMF
staff’s macroeconomic projections.
Australia: Fiscal projections are based on Australian
Bureau of Statistics data, the fiscal year 2018/19 budgets of the commonwealth and states and territories,
2017/18 mid-year fiscal and economic reviews by
states and territories, and the IMF staff’s estimates.
Austria: Fiscal projections are based on data from
Statistics Austria, the authorities’ projections, and the
IMF staff’s estimates and projections.
Belgium: Projections are based on the 2018–21
Stability Programme and other available information
1 The output gap is actual minus potential output, as a
percentage of potential output. Structural balances are expressed
as a percentage of potential output. The structural balance is the
actual net lending/borrowing minus the effects of cyclical output
from potential output, corrected for one-time and other factors,
such as asset and commodity prices and output composition
effects. Changes in the structural balance consequently include
effects of temporary fiscal measures, the impact of fluctuations
in interest rates and debt-service costs, and other noncyclical
fluctuations in net lending/borrowing. The computations of
structural balances are based on the IMF staff’s estimates of
potential GDP and revenue and expenditure elasticities. (See
Annex I of the October 1993 WEO.) Net debt is calculated as
gross debt minus financial assets corresponding to debt instruments. Estimates of the output gap and of the structural balance
are subject to significant margins of uncertainty.

on the authorities’ fiscal plans, with adjustments for
the IMF staff’s assumptions.
Brazil: Fiscal projections for the end of 2018
account for budget performance through May 2018,
and the deficit target approved in the budget law.
Canada: Projections use the baseline forecasts in the
2018 federal budget and the latest provincial budget
updates as available. The IMF staff makes some adjustments to these forecasts, including for differences in
macroeconomic projections. The IMF staff’s forecast
also incorporates the most recent data releases from Statistics Canada’s Canadian System of National Economic
Accounts, including federal, provincial, and territorial
budgetary outturns through the first quarter of 2018.
Chile: Projections are based on the authorities’
budget projections, adjusted to reflect the IMF staff’s
projections for GDP and copper prices.
China: Projections assume that the pace of fiscal
consolidation is likely to be more gradual, reflecting reforms to strengthen social safety nets and the
social security system announced as part of the Third
Plenum reform agenda.
Denmark: Estimates for 2017 are aligned with the
latest official budget numbers, adjusted where appropriate for the IMF staff’s macroeconomic assumptions.
For 2018, the projections incorporate key features
of the medium-term fiscal plan as embodied in the
authorities’ Convergence Programme 2017 submitted
to the European Union.
France: Projections for 2018 reflect the 2018 budget
law. For 2018–23, they are based on the measures in the
multiyear budget and the 2018 budget laws and additional measures expected in the 2019 budget law adjusted
for differences in assumptions on macro and financial
variables, and revenue projections. Historical fiscal data
reflect the May 2018 revisions and update of the historical fiscal accounts, debt data, and national accounts.
Germany: The IMF staff’s projections for 2018 and
beyond are based on the 2018 Stability Programme,
revised 2018 federal budget, and data updates from
the national statistical agency, adjusted for the differences in the IMF staff’s macroeconomic framework
and assumptions concerning revenue elasticities. The
estimate of gross debt includes portfolios of impaired
assets and noncore business transferred to institutions
that are winding up, as well as other financial sector
and EU support operations.
Greece: Fiscal projections reflect adjustments in line
with the primary balance definition under the enhanced
surveillance procedure for Greece.
International Monetary Fund | April 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

147

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Box A1 (continued)
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: Projections
are based on the authorities’ medium-term fiscal projections on expenditures.
Hungary: Fiscal projections include the IMF staff’s
projections of the macroeconomic framework and of
the impact of recent legislative measures, as well as fiscal
policy plans announced in the 2018 budget.
India: Historical data are based on budgetary execution data. Projections are based on available information
on the authorities’ fiscal plans, with adjustments for the
IMF staff’s assumptions. Subnational data are incorporated with a lag of up to one year; general government
data are thus finalized well after central government data.
IMF and Indian presentations differ, particularly regarding divestment and license auction proceeds, net versus
gross recording of revenues in certain minor categories,
and some public sector lending.
Indonesia: IMF projections are based on moderate tax
policy and administration reforms, fuel subsidy pricing
reforms introduced since January 2015, and a gradual
increase in social and capital spending over the medium
term in line with fiscal space.
Ireland: Fiscal projections are based on the country’s
Budget 2018.
Israel: Historical data are based on Government
Finance Statistics data prepared by the Central Bureau
of Statistics. The central government deficit is assumed
to remain at the current ceiling of 2.9 percent of GDP
throughout the projection period, rather than declining
in line with medium-term fiscal targets, consistent with
long experience of revisions to those targets.
Italy: The IMF staff’s estimates and projections are
informed by the fiscal plans included in the government’s 2018 budget and April 2018 Economic and
Financial Document. IMF staff assumes that the
automatic value-added tax hikes for next year will be
canceled.
Japan: The projections include fiscal measures already
announced by the government, including the consumption tax hike in October 2019.
Korea: The medium-term forecast incorporates the
medium-term path for public spending announced by
the government.
Mexico: Fiscal projections for 2018 are broadly in line
with the approved budget; projections for 2019 onward
assume compliance with rules established in the Fiscal
Responsibility Law.
Netherlands: Fiscal projections for 2017–23 are based
on the authorities’ Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis

148

budget projections, after differences in macroeconomic
assumptions are adjusted for. Historical data were revised
following the June 2014 Central Bureau of Statistics
release of revised macro data because of the adoption of
ESA 2010 and the revisions of data sources.
New Zealand: Fiscal projections are based on the fiscal
year 2018/19 budget and 2017 Half-Year Economic and
Fiscal Update, and the IMF staff’s estimates.
Portugal: The projections for the current year are
based on the authorities’ approved budget, adjusted
to reflect the IMF staff’s macroeconomic forecast.
Projections thereafter are based on the assumption of
unchanged policies.
Puerto Rico: Fiscal projections are based on the Puerto
Rico Fiscal and Economic Growth Plans (FEGPs),
which were prepared in April and updated in August
of 2018, and is pending certification by the Oversight
Board. In line with assumptions of this plan, IMF projections assume federal aid for rebuilding after Hurricane
Maria devastated the island in September 2017. The
projections also assume revenue losses from the following: elimination of federal funding for the Affordable
Care Act starting in 2018 for Puerto Rico; elimination
of federal tax incentives starting in 2018 that had neutralized the effects of Puerto Rico’s Act 154 on foreign
firms; and the effects of the Tax Cuts and Job Act, which
reduce tax advantages of US firms producing in Puerto
Rico. Given sizable policy uncertainty, some FEGP and
IMF assumptions may differ, in particular those relating
to the effects of the corporate tax reform, tax compliance, and tax adjustments (fees and rates); reduction of
subsidies and expenses, freezing of payroll operational
costs, and improvement of mobility; and increasing
health care efficiency. On the expenditure side, measures
include extension of Act 66, which freezes much government spending, through 2020; reduction of operating
costs; decreases in government subsidies; and spending
cuts in education. Although IMF policy assumptions are
similar to those in the FEGP scenario with full measures, the IMF’s projections of fiscal revenues, expenditures, and balance are different from FEGP’s. This stems
from two main differences in methodologies: first, while
IMF projections are on an accrual basis, FEGP’s are on
a cash basis. Second, the IMF and FEGP make very
different macroeconomic assumptions. Third, the IMF’s
projections are on a calendar year basis while FEGP’s are
on a fiscal year basis.
Russia: Projections for 2018–21 are the IMF staff’s
estimates, based on the authorities’ budget. Projections

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Box A1 (continued)
for 2022–23 are based on the new oil price rule, with
adjustments by the IMF staff.
Saudi Arabia: Staff baseline projections of total
government revenues reflect the impact of announced
policies in the 2018 Budget. Oil revenues are based on
WEO baseline oil prices and the assumption that Saudi
Arabia continues to meet its commitments under the
OPEC+ agreement. Expenditure projections take the
2018 budget as a starting point and reflect staff estimates of the effects of the latest changes in policies and
economic developments. Expenditures in 2018 include
allowances and other measures announced in the Royal
Decree for one year in January 2018.
Singapore: For fiscal year 2018/19, projections are
based on budget numbers. For the rest of the projection
period, the IMF staff assumes unchanged policies.
South Africa: Fiscal projections are based on the
2018 Budget. Nontax revenue excludes transactions in
financial assets and liabilities, as they involve primarily
revenues associated with realized exchange rate valuation
gains from the holding of foreign currency deposits, sale
of assets, and conceptually similar items.
Spain: For 2018 and beyond, fiscal projections are
based on the information specified in the government’s
2018 Stability Programme and on the IMF staff’s macroeconomic projections.
Sweden: Fiscal projections account for the authorities’ projections based on the 2018 Spring Budget. The
impact of cyclical developments on the fiscal accounts
is calculated using the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development’s 2005 elasticity to take
into account output and employment gaps.
Switzerland: The projections assume that fiscal policy
is adjusted as necessary to keep fiscal balances in line
with the requirements of Switzerland’s fiscal rules.
Turkey: The fiscal projections for 2018 are based on
the authorities’ Medium Term Programme 2018–20,
with adjustments for additionally announced fiscal
measures and the IMF staff’s higher inflation forecast.
For the medium term, the fiscal projections assume a
more gradual fiscal consolidation than envisaged in the
Medium Term Programme.
United Kingdom: Fiscal projections are based on the
country’s November 2017 Budget and the March 2018
update, with expenditure projections based on the
budgeted nominal values and with revenue projections
adjusted for differences between the IMF staff’s forecasts
of macroeconomic variables (such as GDP growth and
inflation) and the forecasts of these variables assumed in

the authorities’ fiscal projections. The IMF staff’s data
exclude public sector banks and the effect of transferring
assets from the Royal Mail Pension Plan to the public
sector in April 2012. Real government consumption
and investment are part of the real GDP path, which,
according to the IMF staff, may or may not be the same
as projected by the UK Office for Budget Responsibility.
United States: Fiscal projections are based on the
August update to the April 2018 Congressional Budget
Office baseline, adjusted for the IMF staff’s policy and
macroeconomic assumptions. Projections incorporate the effects of tax reform (Tax Cuts and Jobs Act,
signed into law end of 2017) as well as the Bipartisan
Budget Act of 2018 passed in February 2018. Finally,
fiscal projections are adjusted to reflect the IMF staff’s
forecasts for key macroeconomic and financial variables
and different accounting treatment of financial sector
support and defined-benefit pension plans, and are converted to a general government basis. Data are compiled
using SNA 2008, and when translated into government
finance statistics, this is in accordance with the Government Finance Statistics Manual 2014. Because of data
limitations, most series begin in 2001.

Monetary Policy Assumptions
Monetary policy assumptions are based on the
established policy framework in each country. In
most cases, this implies a nonaccommodative stance
over the business cycle: official interest rates will
increase when economic indicators suggest that inflation will rise above its acceptable rate or range; they
will decrease when indicators suggest inflation will
not exceed the acceptable rate or range, that output
growth is below its potential rate, and that the margin
of slack in the economy is significant. On this basis,
the London interbank offered rate on six-month US
dollar deposits is assumed to average 2.5 percent in
2018 and 3.4 percent in 2019 (see Table 1.1). The
rate on three-month euro deposits is assumed to average –0.3 percent in 2018 and –0.2 percent in 2019.
The interest rate on six-month Japanese yen deposits
is assumed to average 0.0 percent in 2018 and 0.1
percent in 2019.
Argentina: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent with gradual disinflation of the economy to a
single digit.
Australia: Monetary policy assumptions are in line
with market expectations.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

149

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Box A1 (continued)
Brazil: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent
with gradual convergence of inflation toward the
middle of the target range.
Canada: Monetary policy assumptions are in line
with market expectations.
China: Monetary policy is expected to tighten with
a gradual rise in the interest rate.
Denmark: The monetary policy is to maintain the
peg to the euro.
Euro area: Monetary policy assumptions for euro
area member countries are in line with market
expectations.
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: The IMF
staff assumes that the currency board system remains
intact.
India: The policy (interest) rate assumption is consistent with an inflation rate within the Reserve Bank
of India’s targeted band. Consistent with IMF staff’s
estimates of natural rate of inflation and an inflationforecast targeting policy rule, an additional increase of
policy rate (25–50 basis points) is needed.
Indonesia: Monetary policy assumptions are in line
with the maintenance of inflation within the central
bank’s targeted band.
Japan: Monetary policy assumptions are in line with
market expectations.

150

Korea: Monetary policy assumptions are in line with
market expectations.
Mexico: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent
with attaining the inflation target.
Russia: Monetary projections assume that the
Central Bank of Russia will complete the transition to
a neutral stance at a slower pace given upside risks to
the inflation outlook.
Saudi Arabia: Monetary policy projections are based
on the continuation of the exchange rate peg to the
US dollar.
Singapore: Broad money is projected to grow in line
with the projected growth in nominal GDP.
South Africa: Monetary policy will remain neutral.
Sweden: Monetary projections are in line with Riksbank projections.
Switzerland: The projections assume no change in
the policy rate in 2018–19.
Turkey: The outlook for monetary and financial conditions assumes no changes to the current policy stance.
United Kingdom: The short-term interest rate path is
based on market interest rate expectations.
United States: The IMF staff expects continued
gradual normalization of the federal funds target rate
over the medium term, in line with the broader macroeconomic outlook.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

List of Tables
Output
A1.
A2.
A3.
A4.

Summary of World Output
Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP

Inflation
A5.
A6.
A7.

Summary of Inflation
Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices
Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices

Financial Policies
A8.

Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt

Foreign Trade
A9.

Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices

Current Account Transactions
A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
A11. Advanced Economies: Balance on Current Account
A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account

Balance of Payments and External Financing
A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances

Flow of Funds
A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing

Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

151

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table A1. Summary of World Output1
(Annual percent change)

World
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Other Advanced Economies2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States3
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan
Middle East and North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Memorandum
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2013–17
Memorandum
Median Growth Rate
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Low-Income Developing Countries
Output per Capita4
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Low-Income Developing Countries
World Growth Rate Based on Market
Exchange Rates
Value of World Output (billions of US dollars)
At Market Exchange Rates
At Purchasing Power Parities

Average
2000–09

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

3.9
1.8
1.9
1.4
0.5
2.8
6.1

5.4
3.1
2.6
2.1
4.2
4.6
7.4

4.3
1.7
1.6
1.6
–0.1
3.0
6.4

3.5
1.2
2.2
–0.9
1.5
1.9
5.3

3.5
1.4
1.8
–0.2
2.0
2.4
5.1

3.6
2.1
2.5
1.4
0.4
2.9
4.7

3.5
2.3
2.9
2.1
1.4
2.1
4.3

3.3
1.7
1.6
1.9
1.0
2.1
4.4

3.7
2.3
2.2
2.4
1.7
2.6
4.7

3.7
2.4
2.9
2.0
1.1
2.4
4.7

3.7
2.1
2.5
1.9
0.9
2.2
4.7

3.6
1.5
1.4
1.4
0.5
2.1
4.8

5.9
8.1
4.0
3.0

4.6
9.6
4.3
6.1

5.3
7.9
6.6
4.6

3.7
7.0
2.5
2.9

2.5
6.9
4.9
2.9

1.1
6.8
3.9
1.3

–1.9
6.8
4.7
0.3

0.4
6.5
3.3
–0.6

2.1
6.5
6.0
1.3

2.3
6.5
3.8
1.2

2.4
6.3
2.0
2.2

2.1
6.1
2.7
2.9

5.2
5.2
5.6

4.6
4.8
7.1

4.4
4.5
5.1

4.8
4.9
4.6

2.6
2.4
5.2

2.9
2.7
5.1

2.5
2.4
3.3

5.1
5.2
1.4

2.2
1.8
2.7

2.4
2.0
3.1

2.7
2.5
3.8

3.0
3.0
4.1

1.7
6.3

2.0
7.4

1.8
5.1

–0.3
4.6

0.3
6.1

1.9
6.1

2.4
4.7

2.0
3.6

2.7
4.7

2.2
4.7

2.0
5.2

1.6
5.4

5.7
6.2
3.8

5.1
8.0
6.8

5.2
6.7
4.9

5.0
5.4
2.3

2.6
5.7
4.2

2.2
5.3
2.1

0.3
5.2
2.8

1.9
4.9
1.7

0.9
5.6
2.8

1.2
5.4
1.6

1.9
5.2
2.1

2.0
5.3
3.6

4.9

6.9

5.4

4.2

4.8

4.6

4.2

3.8

4.7

4.8

4.8

5.2

4.7

4.2

2.7

1.5

3.2

1.9

1.0

2.8

3.2

3.9

4.4

5.0

2.4
4.5
5.0

2.3
4.6
6.4

1.9
4.7
6.1

1.0
4.2
5.1

1.5
4.3
5.3

2.5
3.8
4.8

2.0
3.3
3.9

2.2
3.2
4.2

2.9
3.4
4.5

2.8
3.5
4.0

2.5
3.7
4.8

1.9
3.7
5.0

1.1
4.4
3.7

2.5
5.9
5.0

1.1
4.9
3.5

0.7
3.6
1.6

0.9
3.6
3.7

1.6
3.2
3.8

1.7
2.8
2.3

1.2
2.9
1.2

1.9
3.2
2.4

1.9
3.3
2.4

1.7
3.3
3.0

1.1
3.6
3.2

2.6

4.1

3.1

2.5

2.6

2.8

2.8

2.5

3.2

3.2

3.1

2.8

46,626
66,722

66,011
89,402

76,750 78,832 74,602 75,653
105,088 110,805 115,729 120,693

80,051
127,489

84,835
135,236

73,230 74,619
95,018 99,891

1Real

Projections
2019

2023

88,081 108,712
143,089 177,424

GDP.
the United States, euro area countries, and Japan.
3Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure.
4Output per capita is in international currency at purchasing power parity.
2Excludes

152

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A2. Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand1
(Annual percent change)
Average
2000–09
Real GDP
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Netherlands
Belgium
Austria
Greece
Portugal
Ireland
Finland
Slovak Republic
Lithuania
Slovenia
Luxembourg
Latvia
Estonia
Cyprus
Malta
Japan
United Kingdom
Korea
Canada
Australia
Taiwan Province of China
Switzerland
Sweden
Singapore
Hong Kong SAR
Norway
Czech Republic
Israel
Denmark
New Zealand
Puerto Rico
Macao SAR
Iceland
San Marino
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Real Total Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies3
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

Fourth Quarter2
Projections
2017:Q4 2018:Q4 2019:Q4

2016 2017

Projections
2018 2019 2023

1.7
1.6
1.9
2.2
1.1
0.9
3.2
2.2
1.4
1.5
–0.2
1.6
4.9
2.5
3.3
2.3
3.1
3.1
2.2
2.1
3.4
5.2
1.0
1.8
2.9
1.4
2.6
1.4
1.6
2.7
2.4
2.2
1.1
2.5
4.0
2.0
4.1
–1.3
–0.9
7.4
2.2

2.3
2.2
2.4
2.5
2.3
1.5
3.0
2.9
1.7
3.0
1.4
2.7
7.2
2.8
3.4
3.9
5.0
2.3
4.5
4.9
3.9
6.7
1.7
1.7
3.1
3.0
2.2
2.9
1.7
2.1
3.6
3.8
1.9
4.3
3.3
2.3
3.0
–2.4
9.1
4.0
1.9

2.4
2.9
2.0
1.9
1.6
1.2
2.7
2.8
1.5
2.8
2.0
2.3
4.7
2.6
3.9
3.5
4.5
4.0
3.7
3.7
4.0
5.7
1.1
1.4
2.8
2.1
3.2
2.7
3.0
2.4
2.9
3.8
2.1
3.1
3.6
2.0
3.1
–2.3
6.3
3.7
1.4

2.1
2.5
1.9
1.9
1.6
1.0
2.2
2.6
1.5
2.2
2.4
1.8
4.0
1.8
4.1
2.9
3.4
3.5
3.3
3.2
4.2
4.6
0.9
1.5
2.6
2.0
2.8
2.4
1.8
2.2
2.5
2.9
2.1
3.0
3.5
1.9
3.0
–1.1
6.3
2.9
1.0

1.5
1.4
1.4
1.2
1.6
0.7
1.7
1.8
1.5
1.4
1.2
1.4
2.8
1.2
3.4
2.0
2.1
3.0
3.0
2.9
2.4
3.2
0.5
1.6
2.6
1.6
2.6
1.9
1.7
1.9
2.6
3.1
1.8
2.5
3.0
1.7
2.5
–0.8
4.2
2.5
0.8

2.5
2.5
2.7
2.8
2.8
1.6
3.0
3.1
1.9
3.5
2.0
2.4
5.4
2.6
3.6
3.8
6.0
1.8
4.8
5.1
4.0
5.6
2.0
1.3
2.8
3.0
2.4
3.4
2.6
2.7
3.6
3.3
1.6
5.0
3.1
1.3
3.2
...
...
1.9
...

2.3
3.1
1.7
1.9
1.3
0.8
2.5
2.4
1.6
1.8
2.2
2.4
0.3
2.7
4.2
3.1
3.6
3.5
2.5
3.5
4.2
6.7
1.0
1.5
3.2
2.1
3.2
1.9
2.6
1.9
1.9
3.4
2.7
3.2
3.4
3.2
3.1
...
...
2.9
...

1.9
2.3
1.9
1.6
1.7
1.3
2.1
2.6
1.3
2.6
2.5
1.2
6.3
1.4
4.2
3.0
3.3
4.5
4.3
2.3
3.9
3.6
–0.3
1.4
2.3
1.9
2.8
2.1
1.7
2.6
2.6
3.3
1.6
2.5
3.5
2.2
3.0
...
...
4.7
...

2.1

1.5

2.1

2.2

2.0

1.2

2.3

2.2

1.7

2.1
2.6
1.3
1.6
1.5
0.2
2.0
0.4
3.2
1.7
2.7

2.6
3.6
2.4
1.4
1.5
1.5
4.0
1.0
2.3
0.1
2.4

1.9
1.8
2.3
3.0
1.6
1.1
2.6
0.4
2.4
0.9
2.2

2.3
2.5
1.7
2.2
2.2
1.4
2.9
1.2
1.3
3.8
3.3

2.4
3.1
2.0
2.0
1.3
1.4
2.8
0.9
1.3
2.4
2.9

2.4
3.2
1.9
2.1
1.6
1.2
2.0
1.1
1.3
1.3
2.6

1.5
1.2
1.5
1.4
1.6
0.7
1.5
0.5
1.6
1.5
2.5

2.3
2.6
1.3
1.9
2.1
1.2
3.3
1.8
0.6
4.9
3.7

2.6
3.5
2.4
2.3
1.8
1.1
2.7
0.9
1.6
1.4
2.6

2.1
2.8
1.6
1.8
1.3
1.7
1.7
–0.4
1.4
1.2
3.2

2.0

2.4

1.7

2.1

2.3

2.3

1.2

2.3

2.5

1.9

2010 2011

2012

2013 2014

1.8
1.9
1.4
0.8
1.4
0.5
2.7
1.6
1.7
1.7
2.7
0.9
3.6
2.0
4.5
4.6
2.9
3.0
4.7
4.1
3.5
1.6
0.5
1.8
4.7
2.1
3.1
3.8
1.9
2.0
5.2
4.2
1.8
3.4
3.5
1.0
2.9
1.0
...
3.5
...

3.1
2.6
2.1
3.9
1.9
1.7
0.0
1.3
2.7
1.8
–5.5
1.9
1.9
3.0
5.0
1.6
1.2
4.9
–3.9
2.3
1.3
3.5
4.2
1.7
6.5
3.1
2.4
10.6
2.9
6.0
15.2
6.8
0.7
2.3
5.5
1.9
2.0
–0.4
25.3
–3.4
–4.8

1.7
1.6
1.6
3.7
2.2
0.6
–1.0
1.5
1.8
2.9
–9.1
–1.8
3.7
2.6
2.8
6.0
0.6
2.5
6.4
7.6
0.3
1.3
–0.1
1.6
3.7
3.1
2.7
3.8
1.8
2.7
6.4
4.8
1.0
1.8
5.2
1.3
1.9
–0.4
21.7
1.9
–9.3

1.2
2.2
–0.9
0.7
0.3
–2.8
–2.9
–1.0
0.2
0.7
–7.3
–4.0
0.2
–1.4
1.7
3.8
–2.7
–0.4
4.0
4.3
–3.1
2.7
1.5
1.4
2.3
1.7
3.9
2.1
1.0
–0.3
4.1
1.7
2.7
–0.8
2.2
0.2
2.5
0.0
9.2
1.3
–7.6

1.4
1.8
–0.2
0.6
0.6
–1.7
–1.7
–0.1
0.2
0.0
–3.2
–1.1
1.3
–0.8
1.5
3.5
–1.1
3.7
2.4
1.9
–5.9
4.6
2.0
2.0
2.9
2.5
2.2
2.2
1.9
1.2
5.1
3.1
1.0
–0.5
4.2
0.9
2.2
–0.3
11.2
4.1
–3.2

1.4

2.8

1.6

1.4

1.5

1.9

1.7
1.9
1.3
0.3
1.7
0.7
2.9
0.2
2.0
2.8
2.9

2.9
3.0
1.5
2.9
2.1
2.0
–0.5
2.4
2.0
5.1
6.1

1.4
1.5
0.7
3.0
2.1
–0.6
–3.1
0.7
–0.2
3.4
3.1

0.8
2.2
–2.4
–0.8
–0.4
–5.6
–5.1
2.3
1.8
2.0
2.0

1.1
1.6
–0.6
1.0
0.7
–2.6
–3.2
2.4
2.1
2.1
1.5

1.4

2.8

1.4

1.2

1.4

2015

2.1
2.3
2.5
2.9
1.4
2.1
2.2
1.5
1.0
1.0
0.1
1.0
1.4
3.6
1.4
2.0
1.3
1.4
0.8
1.1
0.7 –0.3
0.9
1.8
8.7 25.0
–0.6
0.1
2.8
3.9
3.5
2.0
3.0
2.3
5.8
2.9
1.9
3.0
2.9
1.7
–1.4
2.0
8.2
9.5
0.4
1.4
2.9
2.3
3.3
2.8
2.9
1.0
2.6
2.5
4.0
0.8
2.5
1.3
2.6
4.5
3.9
2.2
2.8
2.4
2.0
2.0
2.7
5.3
3.5
2.6
1.6
1.6
3.2
4.2
–1.2 –1.0
–1.2 –21.6
2.1
4.5
–0.9
0.6

1In

this and other tables, when countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
2From the fourth quarter of the preceding year.
3Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

153

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
(Annual percent change)
Averages
2000–09
2010–19
Private Consumer Expenditure
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Public Consumption
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Gross Fixed Capital Formation
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

154

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Projections
2018
2019

2.1
2.4
1.4
0.7
2.0
0.6
2.5
0.8
2.2
3.2
3.1

1.8
2.4
0.8
1.3
1.0
0.2
0.5
0.8
1.5
2.3
2.7

1.8
1.7
0.8
0.3
1.9
1.2
0.3
2.4
0.7
3.6
3.8

1.1
1.9
0.0
1.4
0.6
0.0
–2.4
–0.4
–0.7
2.3
3.0

0.9
1.5
–1.2
1.4
–0.4
–4.0
–3.5
2.0
1.5
1.9
2.2

1.2
1.5
–0.6
0.8
0.5
–2.4
–3.1
2.4
1.8
2.6
2.3

1.8
2.9
0.9
1.1
0.8
0.2
1.5
–0.9
2.0
2.6
2.4

2.5
3.7
1.8
1.6
1.5
1.9
3.0
0.0
2.6
2.2
2.7

2.2
2.7
2.0
1.9
2.1
1.4
2.8
0.1
3.1
2.3
2.5

2.2
2.5
1.6
2.0
1.0
1.4
2.5
1.0
1.8
3.4
2.7

2.1
2.8
1.5
1.6
0.9
1.0
2.2
0.6
1.1
1.7
2.8

2.0
2.4
1.6
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.8
0.8
1.2
0.7
2.6

1.8

1.7

1.7

1.1

1.1

1.3

1.8

2.5

2.2

2.1

2.0

1.8

2.3
2.2
2.0
1.2
1.7
1.3
5.1
1.7
2.9
2.6
2.9

0.8
0.0
0.8
1.8
1.2
–0.2
0.1
1.2
0.8
1.4
2.6

0.9
0.1
0.8
1.3
1.3
0.6
1.5
1.9
0.3
2.3
2.7

–0.6
–3.0
–0.1
0.9
1.1
–1.8
–0.3
1.9
0.1
1.3
1.6

–0.1
–1.5
–0.3
1.1
1.6
–1.4
–4.7
1.7
1.2
0.7
1.9

–0.1
–1.9
0.3
1.3
1.5
–0.3
–2.1
1.5
–0.2
–0.7
2.3

0.5
–0.8
0.7
1.6
1.3
–0.7
–0.3
0.5
2.2
0.5
2.4

1.7
1.7
1.3
2.9
1.0
–0.6
2.1
1.5
1.4
1.6
2.6

1.9
1.5
1.9
4.0
1.4
0.6
1.0
1.3
0.8
2.2
3.4

0.8
–0.1
1.1
1.6
1.3
0.1
1.9
0.4
–0.1
2.3
2.2

1.6
1.1
1.2
1.4
1.0
0.4
1.5
0.5
1.3
2.4
3.9

2.0
2.7
1.2
2.0
0.3
0.8
1.0
1.1
0.9
1.5
2.6

2.0

0.6

0.7

–1.1

–0.2

–0.5

0.1

1.6

1.6

0.4

1.1

1.9

0.8
0.4
0.9
–0.4
1.6
0.8
2.4
–2.0
0.2
3.1
2.8

3.0
4.3
1.5
3.0
1.8
–0.8
0.3
2.0
3.2
2.5
3.2

2.0
2.2
–0.4
5.0
2.1
–0.5
–4.9
–1.6
4.1
11.4
5.9

3.2
4.6
1.5
7.4
2.0
–1.9
–6.9
1.7
2.6
4.6
4.1

2.6
6.9
–3.4
–0.1
0.2
–9.3
–8.6
3.5
2.1
4.9
3.0

1.7
3.6
–2.3
–1.2
–0.8
–6.6
–3.4
4.9
3.4
1.3
2.5

3.4
4.9
1.6
3.9
0.0
–2.3
4.7
3.1
7.2
2.4
2.5

3.1
3.3
4.8
1.1
1.0
2.1
6.7
1.7
3.4
–5.2
1.9

2.1
1.7
3.9
3.3
2.8
3.2
2.9
1.1
2.3
–2.9
2.3

3.6
4.0
2.5
3.6
4.5
3.8
4.8
2.5
3.4
2.8
3.8

4.1
5.6
4.1
3.3
2.9
3.6
5.6
1.9
0.9
3.7
2.8

4.1
6.0
3.5
3.5
3.2
1.1
3.6
1.2
2.5
2.6
3.0

0.2

3.2

2.3

3.7

3.7

2.2

3.8

2.2

1.8

3.7

4.1

4.2

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Averages
2000–09
2010–19
Final Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Stock Building2
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Foreign Balance2
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Projections
2018
2019

1.8
2.0
1.4
0.5
1.8
0.8
2.9
0.3
2.0
3.0
3.0

1.9
2.4
1.0
1.8
1.2
–0.1
0.4
1.2
1.6
2.2
2.8

1.7
1.6
0.5
1.4
1.8
0.7
–0.7
1.4
1.1
5.0
4.1

1.3
1.6
0.3
2.5
1.0
–0.8
–3.0
0.5
0.0
2.6
3.0

1.1
2.0
–1.5
1.0
0.2
–4.5
–4.8
2.3
1.6
2.4
2.3

1.1
1.3
–0.8
0.5
0.5
–2.8
–3.0
2.8
1.7
1.6
2.4

2.0
2.8
1.0
1.8
0.8
–0.4
1.8
0.2
2.9
2.1
2.5

2.5
3.3
2.3
1.8
1.3
1.4
3.5
0.7
2.5
0.3
2.5

2.2
2.3
2.4
2.6
2.1
1.5
2.6
0.6
2.5
1.1
2.6

2.2
2.5
1.7
2.3
1.8
1.5
2.8
1.2
1.7
3.0
2.9

2.5
3.2
2.0
1.9
1.4
1.4
2.8
1.0
1.1
2.3
2.9

2.4
3.2
2.0
2.1
1.5
1.1
2.0
1.1
1.4
1.3
2.7

1.5

1.8

1.6

1.3

1.4

1.2

1.9

2.3

2.0

2.1

2.3

2.3

–0.1
–0.2
–0.1
–0.2
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1

0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

1.2
1.4
0.9
1.4
0.3
1.3
0.2
1.0
1.0
0.1
1.9

0.2
–0.1
0.5
0.5
1.1
0.2
–0.1
0.2
–0.2
0.7
0.2

–0.2
0.2
–0.9
–1.7
–0.6
–1.1
–0.2
0.0
0.2
–0.3
–0.3

0.0
0.2
0.2
0.5
0.2
0.2
–0.3
–0.4
0.2
0.5
–0.8

0.1
–0.1
0.3
–0.2
0.8
0.6
0.2
0.1
0.7
–0.4
0.2

0.1
0.3
0.0
–0.3
0.2
0.1
0.4
0.3
–0.2
–0.2
0.0

–0.3
–0.5
0.0
0.3
–0.5
–0.4
0.0
–0.2
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3

0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.1
0.4
–0.1
0.1
–0.1
–0.5
0.8
0.2

0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1

–0.1

0.1

1.2

0.2

–0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

–0.3

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.1
–0.1
0.1
0.5
–0.3
–0.2
–0.2
0.1
–0.1
–0.8
0.6

0.0
–0.3
0.4
0.4
–0.1
0.3
0.6
0.1
–0.1
–0.1
0.2

0.1
–0.5
0.6
1.1
–0.2
–0.3
0.5
1.6
–0.7
–2.1
0.0

0.3
0.0
0.9
0.9
0.1
1.2
2.1
–0.9
1.5
–0.3
0.5

0.4
0.0
1.5
1.4
0.7
2.8
2.2
–0.8
–0.4
–0.4
0.5

0.3
0.2
0.3
–0.3
–0.1
0.8
1.5
–0.4
–0.5
0.3
0.9

0.0
–0.3
0.1
0.7
–0.5
–0.1
–0.5
0.0
–0.4
1.1
0.4

–0.3
–0.8
–0.2
0.2
–0.4
–0.5
–0.3
0.3
–0.3
0.9
–0.2

–0.2
–0.3
–0.3
–0.6
–0.5
–0.3
0.8
0.6
–0.7
0.7
0.0

0.1
–0.3
0.8
0.3
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.5
0.6
–0.9
–0.5

–0.1
–0.3
0.1
0.0
0.2
–0.2
–0.1
0.1
0.1
–0.4
0.1

–0.2
–0.8
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.2
0.0
0.1
0.7
0.1

0.0

–0.1

–0.1

0.1

0.2

0.0

–0.1

–0.4

–0.2

0.0

–0.1

–0.4

1Excludes

the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Changes expressed as percent of GDP in the preceding period.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

155

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
(Annual percent change)

Commonwealth of Independent States1,2
Russia
Excluding Russia
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Georgia
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyz Republic
Moldova
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Ukraine3
Uzbekistan
Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
Fiji
India4
Indonesia
Kiribati
Lao P.D.R.
Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nauru
Nepal
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Timor-Leste5
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vietnam
Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Hungary
Kosovo
FYR Macedonia
Montenegro
Poland
Romania
Serbia
Turkey

156

Average
2000–09

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

5.9
5.4
7.5
8.5
14.6
7.2
5.9
8.5
4.6
4.6
8.2
14.2
4.5
6.4
8.1
5.8
8.2
1.4
8.4
10.3
0.9
6.9
5.3
1.4
7.0
4.7
6.3
2.0
0.5
5.6
11.1
...
4.1
...
2.8
4.4
3.2
1.2
5.1
4.3
...
1.1
...
3.3
6.9
4.0
5.9
4.2
5.0
3.0
2.4
...
3.1
...
3.9
4.8
5.1
3.8

4.6
4.5
5.0
2.2
4.6
7.8
6.2
7.3
–0.5
7.1
6.5
9.2
0.3
8.5
9.6
6.0
9.3
2.7
6.0
10.6
3.0
10.3
6.4
–0.9
8.0
7.5
7.1
0.5
3.3
7.3
5.3
13.6
4.8
–0.9
10.1
7.6
–2.0
6.8
8.0
7.5
8.5
3.2
–3.1
1.6
6.4
4.3
3.7
0.8
1.3
–1.5
0.7
3.3
3.4
2.7
3.6
–2.8
0.6
8.5

5.3
5.1
6.0
4.7
–1.6
5.5
7.2
7.5
6.0
6.8
7.4
14.7
5.5
8.3
7.9
6.5
9.7
3.7
7.1
9.5
2.7
6.6
6.2
1.6
8.0
5.3
8.4
3.0
1.0
17.3
5.6
11.7
3.4
6.3
1.1
3.7
5.6
13.2
8.4
0.8
7.7
1.8
7.9
1.2
6.2
6.6
2.5
0.9
1.9
–0.3
1.7
4.4
2.3
3.2
5.0
2.0
1.4
11.1

3.7
3.7
3.6
7.1
2.1
1.7
6.4
5.0
–0.1
–0.7
7.5
11.1
0.2
8.2
7.0
6.3
6.4
0.9
7.3
7.9
1.4
5.5
6.0
4.6
7.8
5.5
2.3
2.8
–1.7
12.3
7.3
10.1
4.8
3.9
4.6
6.7
0.4
4.6
9.1
7.2
5.5
–1.1
–3.8
1.8
5.2
2.5
1.4
–0.7
0.0
–2.3
–1.6
2.8
–0.5
–2.7
1.6
1.2
–1.0
4.8

2.5
1.8
4.2
3.3
5.9
1.0
3.4
6.0
10.9
9.4
7.4
10.2
0.0
8.0
6.9
6.0
3.6
–2.1
7.4
7.8
4.7
6.4
5.6
4.3
8.0
4.7
7.1
–0.5
–3.0
11.6
8.4
34.2
4.1
–1.6
3.8
7.1
–1.9
3.0
3.4
2.7
2.5
–0.6
4.6
2.0
5.4
4.9
1.0
2.4
0.9
–0.5
2.1
3.4
2.9
3.5
1.4
3.5
2.6
8.5

1.1
0.7
1.9
3.6
2.7
1.7
4.6
4.3
4.0
4.8
6.7
10.3
–6.6
8.0
6.8
6.3
4.0
–2.5
7.1
7.3
5.6
7.4
5.0
–0.6
7.6
6.0
7.6
–0.6
–2.5
7.9
8.0
36.5
6.0
2.7
15.4
6.1
1.2
2.3
5.0
1.0
4.1
2.9
1.3
2.3
6.0
3.9
1.8
1.1
1.3
–0.1
4.2
1.2
3.6
1.8
3.3
3.4
–1.8
5.2

–1.9
–2.5
–0.6
3.3
0.6
–3.8
2.9
1.2
3.9
–0.4
6.0
6.5
–9.8
7.9
6.8
6.8
6.2
–0.4
7.0
6.9
3.8
8.2
4.9
10.3
7.3
5.1
2.2
2.0
3.9
2.4
7.0
2.8
3.3
10.1
5.3
6.1
1.6
2.5
5.0
3.0
4.0
3.5
9.1
0.2
6.7
4.7
2.2
3.1
3.6
2.4
3.4
4.1
3.9
3.4
3.8
3.9
0.8
6.1

0.4
–0.2
2.0
0.3
–3.1
–2.5
2.8
1.1
4.3
4.3
6.9
6.2
2.4
7.8
6.5
7.2
7.3
–2.5
7.0
6.7
0.7
7.1
5.0
1.1
7.0
4.2
4.5
3.6
2.9
1.2
5.9
10.4
0.6
0.0
1.6
6.9
7.1
3.5
4.5
3.3
5.3
4.2
3.0
3.5
6.2
3.3
3.4
3.2
3.9
3.5
2.2
4.1
2.9
2.9
3.0
4.8
2.8
3.2

2.1
1.5
3.6
7.5
0.1
2.4
5.0
4.0
4.6
4.5
7.1
6.5
2.5
5.3
6.5
7.4
7.4
1.3
6.9
6.9
3.0
6.7
5.1
3.1
6.9
5.9
4.8
2.5
2.0
5.1
6.8
4.0
7.9
–3.7
2.5
6.7
2.5
3.5
3.3
3.9
–4.6
2.5
3.2
4.2
6.8
6.0
3.8
3.0
3.6
2.8
4.0
3.7
0.0
4.3
4.6
6.9
1.9
7.4

2.3
1.7
3.9
6.0
1.3
4.0
5.5
3.7
2.8
3.8
5.0
6.2
3.5
5.0
6.5
7.3
5.8
2.3
6.9
6.6
3.2
7.3
5.1
2.3
6.8
4.7
4.7
2.3
1.4
6.2
6.4
–2.4
6.3
0.8
–1.1
6.5
1.8
3.4
3.7
4.6
0.8
2.9
4.3
3.8
6.6
3.8
4.0
3.2
3.6
2.8
4.0
4.0
1.6
3.7
4.4
4.0
4.0
3.5

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

Projections
2019
2023
2.4
1.8
3.6
4.8
3.6
3.1
4.8
3.1
4.5
3.8
5.0
5.6
2.7
5.0
6.3
7.1
4.8
5.1
6.8
6.2
3.4
7.4
5.1
2.4
7.0
4.6
5.0
2.2
0.9
6.3
6.8
–1.0
5.0
2.2
3.8
6.6
3.2
2.9
4.3
3.9
5.0
5.5
4.1
3.5
6.5
2.0
3.7
3.5
3.1
2.6
3.3
4.0
2.6
2.5
3.5
3.4
3.5
0.4

2.1
1.2
4.1
4.5
2.0
2.0
5.2
4.6
2.4
3.8
4.0
5.7
3.4
6.0
6.1
7.0
7.5
3.9
6.0
5.6
3.2
7.7
5.4
1.8
6.8
4.8
5.4
1.2
0.6
5.7
7.2
1.7
4.3
2.0
3.8
6.9
2.2
2.8
5.0
3.6
4.8
1.8
3.9
3.0
6.5
2.7
4.0
4.0
2.8
2.1
2.2
4.0
3.4
3.0
2.8
3.1
4.0
2.6

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)

Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Aruba
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan
Afghanistan
Algeria
Bahrain
Djibouti
Egypt
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya4
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Sudan6
Syria7
Tunisia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen

Average
2000–09

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Projections
2019
2023

3.0
2.8
2.3
0.3
1.0
1.4
4.9
3.7
3.4
4.2
3.9
4.2
2.6
4.2
3.9
1.5
2.3
3.3
1.8
0.8
4.5
0.9
1.4
2.9
5.5
2.3
5.0
3.2
2.2
3.1
4.5
6.0
2.2
3.7

6.1
–7.2
10.1
–3.3
1.5
–2.2
3.3
4.1
7.5
5.8
4.3
5.0
0.7
8.3
3.5
2.1
–0.5
2.9
4.4
–5.5
3.7
–1.4
5.1
4.4
5.8
11.1
8.5
–2.9
–1.6
–2.3
5.2
3.5
7.8
–1.5

4.6
–2.1
6.0
3.5
0.6
–0.8
2.1
5.2
4.0
6.1
7.4
4.3
–0.2
3.1
7.9
3.8
0.8
4.2
5.4
5.5
3.8
1.4
3.7
6.3
11.8
4.2
6.5
–0.8
0.6
0.2
5.8
–0.2
5.2
4.2

2.9
3.5
–1.0
–1.4
3.1
–0.1
3.7
5.1
1.9
5.3
3.9
4.8
–1.1
2.7
5.6
2.8
–1.2
3.0
5.0
2.9
4.1
–0.5
3.6
6.5
9.2
–0.5
6.0
–0.8
0.2
1.3
2.7
–1.8
3.5
5.6

2.9
–0.1
2.4
4.2
–0.4
–1.4
0.7
6.8
3.0
4.1
4.6
2.3
0.8
4.9
4.9
2.4
2.4
3.7
5.0
4.2
2.8
0.2
1.4
4.9
6.6
8.4
5.8
6.6
0.3
2.5
2.9
2.7
4.6
1.3

1.3
5.1
–2.5
0.9
–0.1
–0.2
4.0
5.5
0.5
1.8
4.7
3.5
4.2
7.6
3.8
2.0
7.3
4.2
3.9
2.8
3.1
0.6
2.8
4.8
6.0
4.9
2.4
9.5
3.6
0.2
0.3
–1.2
3.2
–3.9

0.3
4.1
2.7
–0.4
1.0
2.2
3.8
4.9
–3.5
2.3
3.0
3.6
–3.7
7.0
0.1
2.4
6.4
4.1
3.1
1.2
3.8
0.9
3.3
4.8
5.8
3.1
3.3
2.7
–0.9
0.8
–2.6
1.7
0.4
–6.2

–0.6
5.3
–1.8
–0.1
–1.7
2.3
–0.5
4.3
–3.5
1.3
2.0
4.2
2.6
6.6
–1.2
2.6
3.7
3.1
3.4
1.5
3.8
1.5
2.9
4.7
5.0
4.3
4.0
2.9
3.4
0.8
–5.1
–6.1
1.7
–16.5

1.3
2.8
2.9
1.2
1.4
–0.2
0.8
4.2
1.0
1.5
1.8
3.3
–4.7
4.6
2.4
2.3
5.1
2.8
2.1
1.2
4.8
0.7
2.0
4.9
5.4
4.8
2.5
2.1
3.0
0.7
1.9
–2.6
2.7
–14.0

1.2
3.5
–2.6
1.1
2.3
–0.5
1.8
4.3
1.4
4.0
2.8
3.3
–14.1
6.4
1.1
2.5
3.6
2.8
3.4
2.0
3.5
1.2
2.2
–4.0
4.6
4.4
4.1
2.7
3.4
2.0
2.0
1.0
2.0
–18.0

2.2
3.0
–1.6
1.0
2.1
–0.1
2.0
4.2
2.4
3.4
3.6
3.3
9.4
5.0
0.7
2.3
3.6
3.4
4.8
2.5
3.6
1.5
2.5
–1.0
6.8
4.2
4.1
3.5
3.6
2.3
2.2
0.9
3.2
–5.0

2.9
2.0
3.2
1.2
1.5
1.8
1.7
3.7
2.2
3.0
3.5
3.4
1.5
5.1
1.8
2.2
2.7
3.5
27.9
3.0
3.7
2.2
3.0
4.2
5.5
4.1
4.0
2.7
1.5
2.5
3.0
2.2
3.0
–1.5

5.2
...
3.9
5.6
3.2
5.0
4.8
10.9
6.5
5.3
5.0
4.2
4.3
4.8
3.5
4.7
12.1
3.4
...
5.7
4.4
4.3
4.9
4.1

4.6
8.4
3.6
4.3
4.1
5.1
5.7
6.4
2.3
–2.4
8.0
3.2
4.8
3.8
2.0
2.6
18.1
5.0
...
1.4
3.4
3.5
1.6
7.7

4.4
6.5
2.8
2.0
7.3
1.8
3.1
7.5
2.6
10.9
0.9
–66.7
4.7
5.2
2.6
3.6
13.4
10.0
...
–2.4
...
–1.9
6.9
–12.7

4.8
14.0
3.4
3.7
4.8
2.2
–7.7
13.9
2.7
7.9
2.8
124.7
5.8
3.0
9.1
3.8
4.7
5.4
1.2
–17.9
...
4.0
4.5
2.4

2.6
5.7
2.8
5.4
5.0
3.3
–0.3
7.6
2.8
0.4
2.7
–36.8
6.1
4.5
5.1
3.7
4.4
2.7
1.4
3.7
...
2.9
5.1
4.8

2.9
2.7
3.8
4.4
6.0
2.9
3.2
0.7
3.1
0.6
2.0
–53.0
5.6
2.7
1.4
4.1
4.0
3.7
0.4
4.8
...
3.0
4.4
–0.2

2.5
1.0
3.7
2.9
6.5
4.4
–1.6
2.5
2.4
–1.0
0.2
–13.0
0.4
4.5
4.7
4.1
3.7
4.1
3.9
1.3
...
1.2
5.1
–16.7

5.1
2.2
3.2
3.5
6.5
4.3
12.5
13.1
2.0
2.2
1.7
–7.4
1.8
1.1
5.0
4.6
2.1
1.7
4.4
3.0
...
1.1
3.0
–13.6

2.2
2.7
1.4
3.8
6.7
4.2
3.7
–2.1
2.0
–3.3
1.5
64.0
3.5
4.1
–0.9
5.4
1.6
–0.9
2.3
1.4
...
2.0
0.8
–5.9

2.4
2.3
2.5
3.2
6.7
5.3
–1.5
1.5
2.3
2.3
1.0
10.9
2.5
3.2
1.9
5.8
2.7
2.2
3.1
–2.3
...
2.4
2.9
–2.6

2.7
3.0
2.7
2.6
6.7
5.5
–3.6
6.5
2.5
4.1
1.4
10.8
5.2
3.2
5.0
4.0
2.8
2.4
3.5
–1.9
...
2.9
3.7
14.7

3.0
5.0
0.5
2.6
6.0
6.0
2.3
2.2
3.0
2.9
2.9
1.5
5.3
4.5
1.5
3.0
2.7
2.3
3.5
0.4
...
4.2
2.9
6.6

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

157

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
South Sudan
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe8

Average
2000–09

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

5.6
8.6
4.2
3.4
5.3
3.4
6.0
3.9
1.0
8.3
2.0
3.1
4.6
0.7
25.3
–0.7
3.3
8.4
0.6
3.7
5.4
2.9
2.0
3.4
3.7
...
3.0
4.2
5.2
4.4
7.6
3.8
4.3
8.3
8.3
4.5
4.0
1.9
8.7
3.6
...
6.2
1.5
7.5
6.8
–6.1

7.1
4.9
2.1
8.6
8.4
5.1
1.5
3.4
3.0
13.6
2.1
7.1
8.7
2.0
–8.9
2.2
3.8
10.6
6.3
6.5
7.9
4.2
4.6
8.4
6.3
6.4
0.3
6.9
5.4
4.4
6.7
6.0
8.4
11.3
7.3
6.7
3.6
5.9
5.3
3.0
...
6.4
6.1
7.7
10.3
15.4

5.1
3.5
3.0
6.0
6.6
4.0
4.0
4.1
3.3
0.1
2.2
6.9
3.4
–4.2
6.5
8.7
2.2
11.4
7.1
–4.3
14.0
5.6
8.1
6.1
6.7
7.7
1.5
4.9
3.2
4.1
7.1
5.1
2.2
4.9
7.8
4.4
1.5
5.4
6.3
3.3
...
7.9
6.4
6.8
5.6
16.3

4.6
8.5
4.8
4.5
6.5
4.4
1.1
4.5
4.1
8.8
3.0
7.1
3.8
10.1
8.3
7.0
4.7
8.7
5.3
5.6
9.3
5.9
–1.7
4.6
4.9
8.4
3.0
1.9
–0.8
3.5
7.2
5.1
11.8
4.3
8.8
3.1
5.1
3.7
15.2
2.2
–52.4
5.1
6.5
2.2
7.6
13.6

5.2
5.0
7.2
11.3
5.8
5.9
0.8
5.4
–36.7
5.8
3.5
8.5
3.3
9.3
–4.1
4.6
6.4
9.9
5.5
4.8
7.3
3.9
3.3
5.9
2.2
8.8
2.3
5.2
2.3
3.4
7.1
5.6
5.3
5.4
4.7
4.8
2.8
6.0
20.7
2.5
29.3
7.3
6.1
4.7
5.1
5.3

5.1
4.8
6.4
4.1
4.3
4.5
0.6
5.9
1.0
6.9
2.0
9.5
6.8
8.8
0.4
2.9
1.9
10.3
4.4
–0.9
4.0
3.7
1.0
5.4
3.0
0.7
3.3
5.7
7.1
3.7
7.4
6.4
7.5
6.3
7.6
6.5
6.6
4.5
4.6
1.8
2.9
7.0
5.9
4.6
4.7
2.8

3.3
0.9
2.1
–1.7
3.9
–4.0
1.0
5.7
4.8
1.8
1.0
6.9
2.6
8.8
–9.1
2.6
0.4
10.4
3.9
5.9
3.8
3.8
6.1
5.7
2.5
0.0
3.1
2.9
6.2
3.6
6.6
6.1
4.3
2.7
8.9
3.8
6.4
4.9
–20.5
1.3
–0.2
7.0
5.7
5.7
2.9
1.4

1.4
–2.6
4.0
4.3
5.9
–1.0
4.7
4.6
4.5
–6.4
2.2
2.4
–2.8
8.3
–8.6
1.9
1.4
8.0
2.1
0.4
3.7
10.5
6.3
5.9
3.1
–1.6
4.2
2.3
5.8
3.8
3.8
0.7
4.9
–1.6
6.0
4.2
6.2
4.5
6.3
0.6
–13.9
7.0
5.1
2.3
3.8
0.7

2.7
–2.5
5.6
2.4
6.4
0.0
4.0
3.5
4.3
–3.1
2.7
3.4
–3.1
7.8
–3.2
5.0
1.6
10.9
0.5
4.6
8.4
8.2
5.9
4.9
–1.6
2.5
4.2
4.0
5.4
3.8
3.7
–0.8
4.9
0.8
6.1
3.9
7.2
5.3
3.7
1.3
–5.1
6.0
4.4
4.8
3.4
3.7

3.1
–0.1
6.0
4.6
5.9
0.1
4.3
3.8
4.3
3.5
2.8
3.8
2.0
7.4
–7.7
4.2
1.3
7.5
2.0
5.4
6.3
5.8
4.5
6.0
0.8
3.0
5.0
3.3
5.1
3.9
3.5
1.1
5.3
1.9
7.2
4.0
7.0
3.6
3.7
0.8
–3.2
5.8
4.7
5.9
3.8
3.6

Projections
2019
2023
3.8
3.1
6.3
3.6
6.0
0.4
4.0
4.4
5.0
3.6
2.8
4.1
3.7
7.0
–2.6
3.8
0.4
8.5
3.4
5.4
7.6
5.9
5.0
6.1
1.2
4.5
5.4
4.7
4.8
4.0
4.0
3.1
5.4
2.3
7.8
4.5
6.7
3.3
5.5
1.4
–4.6
6.6
5.0
6.1
4.5
4.2

4.1
3.8
6.1
5.5
5.3
0.5
4.0
5.4
5.0
4.2
3.3
4.7
0.4
6.5
3.4
4.3
2.0
7.5
4.5
4.8
5.1
5.0
5.0
6.0
1.3
5.3
4.9
6.5
4.8
4.0
11.1
3.4
6.0
2.4
7.5
5.0
6.4
3.3
4.6
1.8
–5.8
6.4
5.4
6.5
4.5
5.0

1Data for some countries refer to real net material product (NMP) or are estimates based on NMP. The figures should be interpreted only as indicative of broad orders of magnitude because
reliable, comparable data are not generally available. In particular, the growth of output of new private enterprises of the informal economy is not fully reflected in the recent figures.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic
structure.
3Data are based on the 2008 System of National Accounts. The revised national accounts data are available beginning in 2000 and exclude Crimea and Sevastopol from 2010 onward.
4See country-specific notes for India and Libya in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
5In this table only, the data for Timor-Leste are based on non-oil GDP.
6Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
7Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
8The Zimbabwe dollar ceased circulating in early 2009. Data are based on IMF staff estimates of price and exchange rate developments in US dollars. IMF staff estimates of US dollar values
may differ from authorities’ estimates. Real GDP is in constant 2009 prices.

158

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A5. Summary of Inflation
(Percent)

GDP Deflators
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Other Advanced Economies1
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area2
Japan
Other Advanced Economies1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States4
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan
Middle East and North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Memorandum
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products5
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2013–17
Memorandum
Median Inflation Rate
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3

Average
2000–09

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Projections
2019
2023

1.8
2.2
2.0
–1.1
2.1

0.9
1.2
0.7
–1.9
2.0

1.3
2.1
1.0
–1.7
2.0

1.3
1.9
1.3
–0.8
1.2

1.3
1.8
1.2
–0.3
1.4

1.4
1.9
0.9
1.7
1.3

1.3
1.1
1.4
2.1
1.0

0.9
1.1
0.7
0.3
1.2

1.4
1.9
1.1
–0.2
1.9

1.8
2.3
1.5
0.8
1.7

1.8
2.1
1.6
1.5
1.7

1.9
1.9
2.0
1.0
1.9

2.0
2.6
2.1
–0.3
2.1
6.8

1.5
1.6
1.6
–0.7
2.4
5.6

2.7
3.1
2.7
–0.3
3.3
7.1

2.0
2.1
2.5
–0.1
2.1
5.8

1.4
1.5
1.3
0.3
1.7
5.5

1.4
1.6
0.4
2.8
1.5
4.7

0.3
0.1
0.0
0.8
0.5
4.7

0.8
1.3
0.2
–0.1
0.9
4.2

1.7
2.1
1.5
0.5
1.8
4.3

2.0
2.4
1.7
1.2
2.0
5.0

1.9
2.1
1.7
1.3
1.9
5.2

2.0
2.2
2.1
1.3
2.0
4.1

13.7
4.0
12.7
6.2

7.2
5.1
5.7
4.2

9.8
6.5
5.4
5.2

6.2
4.6
6.1
4.6

6.5
4.6
4.5
4.6

8.1
3.4
4.1
4.9

15.5
2.7
3.2
5.5

8.3
2.8
3.2
5.6

5.5
2.4
6.2
6.0

4.5
3.0
8.3
6.1

5.7
3.2
9.0
5.9

4.5
3.3
7.2
3.5

6.7
6.6
10.7

6.6
6.3
8.1

9.3
8.8
9.3

9.8
9.7
9.2

9.2
9.4
6.5

6.7
6.5
6.3

5.4
5.5
6.9

4.7
4.9
11.2

6.4
6.7
11.0

10.8
11.8
8.6

10.2
10.6
8.5

6.0
6.2
7.6

2.5
9.7

2.0
9.2

3.1
11.7

2.6
9.9

1.5
8.0

0.5
7.1

0.0
6.9

0.2
8.6

1.7
9.6

1.9
9.5

1.9
8.8

2.1
7.8

10.3
5.9
6.8

6.7
5.3
4.7

8.6
6.7
6.2

8.0
5.3
6.5

8.1
4.9
6.2

6.4
4.2
6.5

8.6
3.8
4.9

6.9
3.7
6.0

5.4
4.0
11.4

7.5
4.6
13.3

8.3
4.6
12.5

5.7
3.9
6.2

8.0

6.8

7.7

7.0

6.3

5.8

5.6

5.3

5.7

5.9

5.8

4.7

8.9

9.5

10.3

7.9

6.7

10.1

13.8

8.5

16.8

16.7

11.9

7.8

2.3
5.2

1.9
4.1

3.2
5.4

2.6
4.5

1.4
3.8

0.7
3.1

0.1
2.7

0.6
2.7

1.6
3.3

1.8
3.6

1.8
3.7

2.0
3.0

1Excludes

the United States, euro area countries, and Japan.
on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
3Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina starting from 2017 onward. See country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic
structure.
5Includes Argentina starting from 2017 onward. See country-specific note for Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
2Based

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

159

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area3
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Netherlands
Belgium
Austria
Greece
Portugal
Ireland
Finland
Slovak Republic
Lithuania
Slovenia
Luxembourg
Latvia
Estonia
Cyprus
Malta
Japan
United Kingdom
Korea
Canada
Australia
Taiwan Province of China
Switzerland
Sweden
Singapore
Hong Kong SAR
Norway
Czech Republic
Israel
Denmark
New Zealand
Puerto Rico
Macao SAR
Iceland
San Marino
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

Average
2000–09
2.0
2.6
2.1
1.6
1.9
2.3
3.0
2.3
2.1
1.9
3.2
2.6
2.9
1.8
5.2
3.0
4.9
2.7
5.8
4.3
2.6
2.5
–0.3
1.8
3.1
2.1
3.2
0.9
1.0
1.9
1.5
–0.2
2.1
2.8
2.0
2.1
2.7
2.8
...
6.2
...
1.9

2010
1.5
1.6
1.6
1.2
1.7
1.6
1.8
0.9
2.3
1.7
4.7
1.4
–1.6
1.7
0.7
1.2
1.8
2.8
–1.2
2.7
2.6
2.0
–0.7
3.3
2.9
1.8
2.9
1.1
0.7
1.9
2.8
2.3
2.4
1.5
2.7
2.3
2.3
2.5
2.8
5.4
2.6

2011
2.7
3.1
2.7
2.5
2.3
2.9
3.2
2.5
3.4
3.5
3.1
3.6
1.2
3.3
4.1
4.1
1.8
3.7
4.2
5.1
3.5
2.5
–0.3
4.5
4.0
2.9
3.3
1.4
0.2
1.4
5.2
5.3
1.3
1.9
3.5
2.8
4.1
2.9
5.8
4.0
2.0

2012
2.0
2.1
2.5
2.1
2.2
3.3
2.4
2.8
2.6
2.6
1.0
2.8
1.9
3.2
3.7
3.2
2.6
2.9
2.3
4.2
3.1
3.2
–0.1
2.8
2.2
1.5
1.7
1.6
–0.7
0.9
4.6
4.1
0.7
3.3
1.7
2.4
1.0
1.3
6.1
5.2
2.8

2013
1.4
1.5
1.3
1.6
1.0
1.2
1.4
2.6
1.2
2.1
–0.9
0.4
0.6
2.2
1.5
1.2
1.8
1.7
0.0
3.2
0.4
1.0
0.3
2.6
1.3
0.9
2.5
1.0
–0.2
0.4
2.4
4.3
2.1
1.4
1.5
0.8
1.1
1.1
5.5
3.9
1.6

2014
1.4
1.6
0.4
0.8
0.6
0.2
–0.1
0.3
0.5
1.5
–1.4
–0.2
0.3
1.2
–0.1
0.2
0.2
0.7
0.7
0.5
–0.3
0.8
2.8
1.5
1.3
1.9
2.5
1.3
0.0
0.2
1.0
4.4
2.0
0.3
0.5
0.6
1.2
0.6
6.0
2.0
1.1

2015
0.3
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
–0.5
0.2
0.6
0.8
–1.1
0.5
0.0
–0.2
–0.3
–0.7
–0.5
0.1
0.2
0.1
–1.5
1.2
0.8
0.0
0.7
1.1
1.5
–0.6
–1.1
0.7
–0.5
3.0
2.2
0.3
–0.6
0.5
0.3
–0.8
4.6
1.6
0.1

2016
0.8
1.3
0.2
0.4
0.3
–0.1
–0.2
0.1
1.8
1.0
0.0
0.6
–0.2
0.4
–0.5
0.7
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.8
–1.2
0.9
–0.1
0.7
1.0
1.4
1.3
1.0
–0.4
1.1
–0.5
2.4
3.6
0.7
–0.5
0.3
0.6
–0.3
2.4
1.7
0.6

2017
1.7
2.1
1.5
1.7
1.2
1.3
2.0
1.3
2.2
2.2
1.1
1.6
0.3
0.8
1.3
3.7
1.4
2.1
2.9
3.7
0.7
1.3
0.5
2.7
1.9
1.6
2.0
1.1
0.5
1.9
0.6
1.5
1.9
2.4
0.2
1.1
1.9
1.8
1.2
1.8
1.0

1.4

2.6

1.9

1.3

1.5

0.3

0.8

1.8

Projections
2018 2019 2023
2.0
1.9
2.0
2.4
2.1
2.2
1.7
1.7
2.1
1.8
1.8
2.6
1.9
1.8
1.9
1.3
1.4
1.7
1.8
1.8
1.9
1.4
1.6
2.1
2.2
1.8
2.0
2.0
2.1
2.0
0.7
1.2
1.8
1.7
1.6
2.1
0.7
1.2
2.0
1.2
1.7
2.0
2.6
2.2
2.0
2.5
2.2
2.5
2.1
2.0
2.0
1.5
1.8
2.0
2.7
2.4
2.3
3.0
2.5
2.1
0.8
1.8
2.0
1.8
2.1
2.0
1.2
1.3
1.3
2.5
2.2
2.0
1.5
1.8
2.0
2.6
2.2
2.0
2.2
2.3
2.5
1.5
1.3
2.0
1.1
1.4
1.0
1.9
1.7
2.0
1.0
1.4
1.3
2.3
2.1
2.5
1.9
2.0
2.0
2.3
2.3
2.0
0.9
1.3
2.0
1.4
1.7
2.0
1.4
1.7
2.0
2.7
1.2
1.2
2.2
2.4
2.8
2.5
2.6
2.5
1.5
1.6
1.8
2.1

1Movements

in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
2Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.

160

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

1.9

2.0

End of Period2
Projections
2017 2018 2019
1.7
1.9
2.0
2.2
2.1
2.3
1.4
1.9
1.7
1.6
1.8
1.9
1.3
1.6
2.2
1.0
1.9
1.4
1.1
2.2
1.7
1.2
1.5
1.7
2.1
1.9
1.6
2.3
1.9
2.1
1.0
0.9
1.3
1.6
4.7
–2.5
–0.1
1.8
1.3
0.5
1.6
1.7
2.0
2.8
2.0
3.8
2.2
2.2
1.7
2.1
2.0
1.5
0.7
3.7
2.2
2.7
2.4
3.8
3.0
2.5
–0.4
2.4
2.0
1.3
2.1
2.1
0.6
1.4
1.7
3.0
2.3
2.1
1.5
1.6
1.9
1.8
2.7
2.1
2.0
2.2
2.4
1.2
1.5
1.3
0.9
1.4
1.1
1.8
2.0
1.6
0.4
2.0
1.3
1.5
2.3
2.1
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.4
2.6
2.1
0.4
1.2
1.5
1.0
1.6
1.8
1.6
1.6
1.9
1.2
2.7
1.2
2.0
2.2
2.4
1.9
2.6
2.6
1.0
1.5
1.6
1.8

2.0

2.1

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)
2017

Projections
2018 2019 2023

End of Period2
Projections
2017 2018 2019

8.3
7.1
11.3
–1.4
12.6
11.8
2.1
14.6
0.4
6.4
5.9
3.6
13.9
8.0
2.8
5.7
7.6
–0.7
3.0
2.0
3.9
4.5
3.5
1.9
1.6
2.1
0.8
–1.5
0.5
0.5
6.8
8.2
9.9
–1.0
6.7
1.3
0.1
0.5
4.0
0.2
–1.3
2.6
3.5
0.8
2.7
3.2
1.3
–1.1
–1.3
–1.1
0.4
0.3
–0.2
–0.3
–0.6
–1.6

5.5
3.7
9.9
0.9
13.0
6.0
6.0
7.4
3.2
6.6
7.3
8.0
14.4
12.5
2.4
5.6
5.8
–0.2
2.9
1.6
3.4
3.6
3.8
0.4
0.8
3.8
2.3
0.0
0.5
4.6
4.0
5.1
4.5
0.9
5.4
2.9
1.3
0.5
6.5
0.7
0.6
7.4
4.1
3.1
3.5
6.2
2.0
1.2
1.2
1.1
2.4
1.5
1.4
2.4
2.0
1.3

4.5
2.8
8.6
3.0
3.5
5.5
2.8
6.4
2.9
3.6
5.8
9.4
10.9
19.2
3.0
6.0
4.6
0.4
3.3
2.2
3.9
4.7
3.4
2.5
0.9
1.0
1.7
1.4
2.0
7.6
6.0
3.8
4.2
2.5
4.2
4.9
3.4
1.0
4.8
0.9
1.8
5.2
4.2
4.8
3.8
8.3
2.3
1.4
2.6
1.6
2.8
0.8
1.8
2.8
2.0
4.7

5.7
5.1
7.0
4.4
3.3
5.5
2.7
5.6
4.6
4.9
5.5
8.2
7.3
14.9
3.2
6.1
4.9
0.5
3.3
2.4
3.2
4.9
3.8
2.5
4.5
2.3
2.7
1.5
2.0
8.0
5.8
2.5
5.0
2.3
3.8
4.0
3.0
1.6
4.8
0.9
2.7
5.3
3.7
3.4
4.0
9.0
2.8
1.6
2.3
1.5
3.3
2.1
2.0
2.0
2.8
2.7

4.5
4.6
4.4
4.0
3.0
5.0
3.0
2.1
5.0
5.0
6.0
6.0
5.2
7.6
3.3
5.5
4.7
0.5
3.0
3.0
3.0
4.0
3.0
2.5
3.1
2.3
2.3
2.0
2.0
6.8
5.4
2.0
5.5
2.0
3.8
3.0
3.0
4.2
4.9
2.0
4.0
2.5
2.9
3.0
4.0
7.2
3.0
2.0
2.3
1.8
3.0
2.2
2.2
2.0
2.5
2.5

4.7
2.5
10.1
2.7
10.0
4.6
6.7
7.1
3.7
7.3
6.7
10.4
13.7
18.9
2.8
5.7
3.0
0.0
2.2
1.8
2.8
4.6
3.6
2.5
0.1
3.5
2.2
0.0
0.5
7.2
5.4
1.6
2.7
0.5
4.7
2.9
1.0
2.1
7.1
0.8
0.8
5.6
4.4
3.3
2.6
6.8
1.8
1.6
1.8
1.2
2.1
0.5
2.4
1.9
2.1
3.3

4.8
3.6
7.9
4.7
3.5
5.5
2.5
6.0
4.1
3.0
5.0
9.4
9.0
17.5
3.4
5.8
4.5
0.5
3.5
2.5
4.5
5.1
3.6
2.5
2.6
3.0
2.0
1.4
2.0
8.0
6.3
3.0
4.6
2.5
4.2
5.2
3.0
3.4
4.7
0.5
2.5
9.4
4.0
4.6
4.0
10.5
2.5
1.7
3.0
1.3
3.1
2.4
2.0
2.9
2.3
3.5

6.0
5.7
6.4
4.2
3.3
5.5
3.0
5.2
5.0
5.7
6.0
8.2
6.2
13.1
3.0
6.1
4.6
0.5
3.2
2.3
3.0
3.9
4.0
2.5
2.9
2.5
2.1
1.5
2.0
8.1
5.9
2.8
5.6
2.3
3.8
3.7
2.9
3.3
4.8
1.1
2.8
1.5
3.4
3.4
4.0
8.5
2.9
1.8
2.3
1.5
3.1
2.0
2.0
1.9
2.9
2.8

1.1
7.8

3.1
11.1

2.1
15.0

2.3
16.7

3.0
13.0

3.0
11.9

2.4
20.0

2.5
15.5

Average
2000–09

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Commonwealth of Independent
States3,4
Russia
Excluding Russia
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Georgia
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyz Republic
Moldova
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Ukraine5
Uzbekistan
Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
Fiji
India
Indonesia
Kiribati
Lao P.D.R.
Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nauru
Nepal
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vietnam
Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria6
Croatia
Hungary
Kosovo
FYR Macedonia
Montenegro
Poland
Romania

13.7
13.9
13.3
3.6
7.0
31.6
7.3
9.2
8.5
11.7
16.0
7.6
12.9
15.8
4.0
5.6
4.8
0.6
4.6
1.8
3.4
5.8
8.5
3.5
7.8
2.2
3.2
...
3.1
8.9
18.9
...
5.5
...
7.5
5.2
5.7
9.1
9.7
2.4
...
8.0
...
2.9
6.5
12.7
2.7
2.4
6.7
3.2
6.1
...
2.6
10.1
3.5
15.7

7.2
6.9
8.1
7.3
5.7
7.7
7.1
7.1
8.0
7.4
6.5
4.4
9.4
12.3
5.1
9.4
5.7
0.2
4.0
3.3
3.7
9.5
5.1
–3.9
6.0
1.7
6.2
1.8
3.7
10.3
8.2
–2.0
9.6
1.4
5.1
4.1
–0.2
1.0
6.2
3.3
5.2
3.5
–1.9
2.8
9.2
5.7
3.6
2.2
3.0
1.0
4.9
3.5
1.5
0.4
2.6
6.1

9.8
8.4
13.3
7.7
7.8
53.2
8.5
8.3
16.6
7.6
12.4
5.3
8.0
12.4
6.5
11.5
7.3
0.1
5.5
5.4
7.3
9.5
5.3
1.5
7.6
3.2
11.3
5.4
4.1
7.7
2.8
–3.4
9.6
4.7
4.4
4.8
2.9
7.4
6.7
3.8
13.2
6.3
0.5
0.9
18.7
5.4
3.4
3.7
3.4
2.3
3.9
7.3
3.9
3.5
4.3
5.8

6.2
5.1
9.2
2.5
1.1
59.2
–0.9
5.1
2.8
4.6
5.8
5.3
0.6
11.9
4.6
6.2
9.3
0.1
2.9
2.6
3.4
10.0
4.0
–3.0
4.3
1.7
10.9
4.3
6.3
15.0
2.8
0.3
8.3
3.6
4.5
3.0
6.2
5.9
7.5
3.0
10.9
1.1
1.4
1.3
9.1
6.1
2.0
2.1
2.4
3.4
5.7
2.5
3.3
4.1
3.7
3.3

6.5
6.8
5.7
5.8
2.5
18.3
–0.5
5.8
6.6
4.6
5.0
6.8
–0.3
11.7
4.6
7.5
11.3
0.4
3.0
2.6
2.9
9.4
6.4
–1.5
6.4
2.1
3.8
1.9
2.2
8.6
5.7
–1.1
9.9
3.4
5.0
2.6
–0.2
5.4
6.9
2.2
9.5
2.1
2.0
1.5
6.6
4.5
1.9
–0.1
0.4
2.2
1.7
1.8
2.8
2.2
0.9
4.0

8.1
7.8
8.8
3.0
1.5
18.1
3.1
6.7
7.5
5.1
6.1
6.0
12.1
9.1
3.4
7.0
9.5
–0.2
3.9
2.0
0.5
5.8
6.4
2.1
4.1
3.1
2.1
1.1
0.7
12.9
5.1
0.3
9.0
4.1
5.2
3.6
–1.2
5.2
2.8
1.9
0.7
1.2
1.1
0.8
4.1
4.1
1.6
–0.9
–1.6
–0.2
–0.2
0.4
–0.3
–0.7
0.0
1.1

15.5
15.5
15.5
3.7
4.1
13.5
4.0
6.7
6.5
9.6
5.8
7.4
48.7
8.5
2.7
6.2
7.6
–0.4
1.2
1.4
1.4
4.9
6.4
0.6
1.3
2.1
1.9
–2.2
–0.2
5.9
10.0
9.8
7.2
0.9
6.0
0.7
1.9
–0.6
2.2
–0.9
0.6
–1.1
3.1
2.5
0.6
3.2
1.9
–1.0
–1.1
–0.5
–0.1
–0.5
–0.3
1.5
–0.9
–0.6

Serbia
Turkey

20.2
21.7

6.1
8.6

11.1
6.5

7.3
8.9

7.7
7.5

2.1
8.9

1.4
7.7

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

161

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Average
2000–09 2010
Latin America and the
Caribbean7
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina8
Aruba
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the
Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela8
Middle East, North
Africa, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan
Afghanistan
Algeria
Bahrain
Djibouti
Egypt
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya8
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Sudan9
Syria10
Tunisia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen

162

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Projections
2019

5.5
1.0
...
0.5
1.9
–1.1
–0.9
4.1
9.0
4.3
5.0
0.8
–0.8
0.8
4.0
–0.7
–0.6
2.4
–0.9
7.5
3.2
3.7
2.7
4.0
0.1
3.1
3.5
–2.3
–1.0

5.6
–0.5
...
–0.9
–0.3
1.5
0.7
3.6
8.7
3.8
7.5
0.0
0.0
1.6
1.7
0.6
1.7
4.4
0.8
13.4
2.7
2.3
2.8
3.5
0.7
4.1
3.6
–0.3
–3.1

6.0
2.5
25.7
–0.5
1.4
4.4
1.1
2.8
3.4
2.2
4.3
1.6
0.6
3.3
0.4
1.0
0.9
4.4
2.0
14.7
3.9
4.4
6.0
3.9
0.9
3.6
2.8
0.0
0.1

6.1
1.4
31.8
1.0
2.5
4.2
1.3
3.2
3.7
2.4
3.2
2.4
1.4
4.3
–0.2
1.2
2.6
3.7
1.3
13.3
4.4
3.4
4.8
5.9
2.0
4.2
1.4
1.4
1.9

5.9
2.0
31.7
1.5
2.9
0.8
1.9
4.2
4.2
3.0
3.4
2.6
1.6
4.2
0.5
1.8
1.8
3.9
2.9
11.6
4.5
4.2
3.6
8.0
2.4
4.0
2.0
2.0
1.9

2023
3.5
2.0
4.9
2.1
2.1
2.3
1.7
4.5
4.0
3.0
3.0
3.0
1.6
4.0
1.2
2.0
2.0
4.0
3.3
5.5
4.0
5.0
3.0
7.0
2.0
4.0
2.0
2.0
1.5

End of Period2
Projections
2017
2018
2019

6.2
1.8
8.4
3.6
2.3
3.7
2.5
4.8
6.9
3.5
6.3
10.9
2.0
12.2
15.3
3.5
2.8
7.0
6.1
14.8
8.2
10.9
5.2
8.9
2.4
8.2
2.6
3.4
2.8

4.2
3.4
10.5
2.1
1.6
5.8
0.9
2.5
5.0
1.4
2.3
5.7
2.8
6.3
3.6
1.2
3.4
3.9
4.3
4.1
4.7
12.6
4.2
5.5
3.5
4.6
1.5
0.9
3.3

5.2
3.5
9.8
4.4
3.1
9.4
1.7
9.9
6.6
3.3
3.4
4.9
1.1
8.5
4.5
5.1
3.0
6.2
4.4
7.4
6.8
7.5
3.4
8.1
5.9
8.2
3.4
5.8
2.8

4.6
3.4
10.0
0.6
1.9
4.5
1.2
4.5
5.4
3.0
3.2
4.5
1.4
3.7
5.1
1.7
2.4
3.8
2.4
6.8
5.2
6.9
4.1
7.2
5.7
3.7
3.7
0.8
4.2

4.6
1.1
10.6
–2.4
0.4
1.8
0.5
5.7
6.2
1.9
2.0
5.2
0.0
4.8
2.7
0.8
0.0
4.3
1.9
6.8
5.2
9.4
3.8
7.1
4.0
2.7
2.8
1.1
1.5

4.9
1.1
...
0.4
1.2
1.8
1.2
5.8
6.3
4.4
2.9
4.5
0.8
3.0
3.6
1.1
–1.0
3.4
0.7
3.9
6.1
8.3
4.0
6.0
2.6
5.0
3.2
0.2
3.5

2.9
15.3
6.3
8.5
20.8

0.8
6.9
10.5
6.7
28.2

3.2
17.7
5.1
8.1
26.1

2.6
5.0
9.3
8.1
21.1

0.8
1.9
5.2
8.6
43.5

0.2 –1.7 –0.2
2.2
2.4
2.0
2.0
3.0
2.0
2.0
3.4
6.9 55.5
22.0
7.8
6.0
3.4
9.3
6.8
6.0
4.7
3.1
1.9
2.3
3.1
3.8
1.3
2.3
3.1
5.7
8.9
8.7
9.6
6.2
7.6
6.7
6.1
6.6
7.9
6.5
57.3 111.8 254.4 1,087.5 1,370,000.0 10,000,000.0 10,000,000.0 2,818.2 2,500,000.0 10,000,000.0

6.7
...
3.2
1.6
3.4
7.0
14.7
...
3.6
2.9
2.4
–0.1
6.2
1.9
2.5
7.5
5.5
1.6
...
10.2
4.8
3.2
5.5
10.9

6.6
2.2
3.9
2.0
4.0
11.7
12.3
2.4
4.8
4.5
4.0
2.5
6.3
1.0
3.3
10.1
–2.4
3.8
...
13.0
4.4
4.4
0.9
11.2

9.3
11.8
4.5
–0.4
5.1
11.1
21.5
5.6
4.2
4.9
5.0
15.9
5.7
0.9
4.0
13.7
2.0
3.8
...
18.1
...
3.5
0.9
19.5

9.8
6.4
8.9
2.8
3.7
8.6
30.6
6.1
4.5
3.2
6.6
6.1
4.9
1.3
2.9
11.0
1.8
2.9
...
35.6
...
5.1
0.7
9.9

9.2
7.4
3.3
3.3
2.4
6.9
34.7
1.9
4.8
2.7
4.8
2.6
4.1
1.9
1.2
7.4
3.2
3.5
...
36.5
...
5.8
1.1
11.0

6.7
4.7
2.9
2.7
2.9
10.1
15.6
2.2
2.9
3.1
1.9
2.4
3.8
0.4
1.0
8.6
3.4
2.2
...
36.9
...
4.9
2.3
8.2

5.4
4.7
–0.7
4.4
4.8
6.4
1.8
2.8
2.1
2.7
11.0 10.2
11.9
9.1
1.4
0.5
–0.9 –0.8
3.7
3.5
–3.7 –0.8
9.8 25.9
0.5
1.5
1.5
1.6
0.1
1.1
4.5
2.9
1.8
2.7
1.3
2.0
...
...
16.9 17.8
...
...
4.9
3.7
4.1
1.6
12.0 –12.6

6.4
5.0
5.6
1.4
0.7
23.5
9.6
0.1
3.3
1.5
4.5
28.5
2.3
0.8
1.6
4.1
0.4
–0.9
...
32.4
...
5.3
2.0
24.7

10.8
3.0
6.5
3.0
1.0
20.9
29.6
2.0
4.5
0.8
6.5
28.1
3.8
2.4
1.5
3.9
3.7
2.6
...
61.8
...
8.1
3.5
41.8

10.2
4.0
6.7
4.8
2.5
14.0
34.1
2.0
2.3
3.0
3.5
17.9
3.9
1.4
3.2
7.5
3.5
2.0
...
49.2
...
7.5
1.9
20.0

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

6.0
5.0
12.0
1.5
2.5
7.0
12.0
2.0
2.5
2.7
2.4
12.3
4.2
2.0
3.0
5.0
2.0
2.1
...
61.1
...
4.0
1.9
5.0

5.9
2.8
24.8
–0.3
2.0
6.6
1.1
2.7
2.9
2.3
4.1
2.6
1.4
4.2
–0.2
2.0
0.5
5.7
1.5
15.4
4.7
5.2
6.8
5.7
0.5
4.5
1.4
0.8
2.2

7.1
3.0
4.9
1.4
–1.0
29.8
8.3
0.2
3.2
1.5
5.0
34.0
1.2
1.9
1.6
3.9
...
–1.1
5.3
25.2
...
6.4
2.0
53.5

6.8
2.0
40.5
0.5
3.0
0.0
1.6
3.7
4.2
2.9
3.1
2.2
1.4
4.1
0.7
1.4
3.0
3.2
2.2
13.0
4.7
3.5
4.3
7.0
2.0
4.1
2.4
2.0
2.0

13.0
3.0
9.0
2.9
1.5
14.4
47.8
2.0
4.2
0.8
5.4
23.7
4.1
2.4
1.5
5.2
...
2.6
2.8
64.3
...
8.9
3.5
30.0

4.9
2.0
20.2
1.6
2.8
1.4
2.1
4.5
4.2
3.0
3.0
3.0
1.8
4.1
0.1
2.0
1.9
3.9
3.0
10.0
4.5
5.0
3.1
7.0
2.4
4.0
2.0
2.0
1.5

9.0
4.0
4.8
4.3
2.5
11.1
27.7
2.0
2.5
3.0
2.4
13.4
3.9
1.4
3.2
7.7
...
2.0
2.5
56.8
...
6.8
1.9
10.0

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
South Sudan
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe11

Average
2000–09

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

10.7
62.4
3.2
8.7
2.8
10.7
2.0
2.6
3.4
3.5
4.4
61.5
2.9
3.0
5.6
18.7
7.9
10.3
1.1
6.6
17.7
15.1
3.0
7.3
7.3
9.8
10.4
10.1
2.5
5.9
10.5
7.6
3.1
12.3
8.1
15.9
2.0
8.6
7.4
6.0
...
6.5
3.0
6.4
17.2
–5.5

8.1
14.5
2.2
6.9
–0.6
6.5
2.1
1.3
1.5
–2.1
3.9
23.5
0.4
1.4
5.3
11.2
4.5
8.1
1.4
5.0
6.7
15.5
1.1
4.3
3.3
7.3
9.2
7.4
1.3
2.9
12.7
4.9
–2.8
13.7
2.3
13.3
1.2
–2.4
7.9
4.3
...
7.2
1.4
3.7
8.5
3.0

9.3
13.5
2.7
8.5
2.8
9.6
4.5
2.9
1.2
1.9
2.2
14.9
1.8
4.9
4.8
3.9
6.1
33.2
1.3
4.8
7.7
21.4
5.1
14.0
6.0
8.5
9.5
7.6
3.1
6.5
10.4
5.0
2.9
10.8
5.7
14.3
3.4
2.6
6.1
5.0
...
12.7
3.6
15.0
8.7
3.5

9.2
10.3
6.7
7.5
3.8
18.2
2.5
2.4
5.9
7.7
5.9
0.9
5.0
1.3
3.4
6.0
8.9
24.1
2.7
4.6
7.1
15.2
2.1
9.4
5.5
6.8
5.7
21.3
5.3
3.9
2.1
6.7
0.5
12.2
6.3
10.6
1.4
7.1
6.6
5.6
45.1
16.0
2.6
12.7
6.6
3.7

6.5
8.8
1.0
5.9
0.5
7.9
1.5
2.1
6.6
0.2
1.6
0.9
4.6
2.6
3.2
6.5
5.6
8.1
0.5
5.2
11.7
11.9
0.8
5.7
5.0
7.6
5.8
28.3
–0.6
3.5
4.2
5.6
2.3
8.5
4.2
8.1
0.7
4.3
5.5
5.8
0.0
7.9
1.8
4.9
7.0
1.6

6.3
7.3
–1.1
4.4
–0.3
4.4
–0.2
1.9
11.6
1.7
1.3
1.2
0.9
0.4
4.3
10.0
5.7
7.4
4.5
6.3
15.5
9.7
–1.0
6.9
4.6
9.9
6.1
23.8
0.9
3.2
2.3
5.3
–0.9
8.0
1.8
7.0
–1.1
1.4
4.6
6.1
1.7
6.1
0.2
3.1
7.8
–0.2

6.9
9.2
0.3
3.1
0.9
5.6
0.1
2.7
4.5
6.8
2.0
1.0
3.2
1.2
1.7
9.0
5.0
10.1
–0.1
6.8
17.2
8.2
1.5
6.6
4.3
7.7
7.4
21.9
1.4
1.3
2.4
3.4
1.0
9.0
2.5
5.3
0.1
4.0
6.7
4.6
52.8
5.6
1.8
5.4
10.1
–2.4

11.2
30.7
–0.8
2.8
–0.2
5.5
–1.4
0.9
4.6
–1.1
1.8
18.2
3.2
0.7
1.4
9.0
7.8
7.3
2.1
7.2
17.5
8.2
1.5
6.3
6.2
8.8
6.7
21.7
–1.8
1.0
19.2
6.7
0.2
15.7
5.7
5.4
0.8
–1.0
10.9
6.3
379.8
5.2
0.9
5.5
17.9
–1.6

11.0
29.8
0.1
3.3
0.4
16.6
0.8
0.6
4.1
–0.9
1.0
41.5
0.5
0.8
0.7
9.0
6.2
9.9
2.7
8.0
12.4
8.9
1.1
8.0
5.3
12.4
8.3
12.2
1.8
3.7
15.3
6.1
2.4
16.5
4.8
5.7
1.3
2.9
18.2
5.3
187.9
5.3
–0.7
5.6
6.6
0.9

Projections
2018 2019 2023
8.6
20.5
2.3
3.8
2.0
1.2
1.0
1.0
4.0
2.1
2.0
23.0
1.2
1.7
0.9
9.0
5.0
12.7
2.8
6.2
9.5
8.2
2.0
5.0
6.3
21.3
7.8
9.2
2.5
5.1
6.0
3.5
3.9
12.4
3.3
6.8
0.4
4.4
15.6
4.8
106.4
3.8
0.4
3.8
8.5
3.9

8.5
15.8
2.3
3.9
2.0
7.3
1.6
1.1
3.4
2.6
2.0
13.5
2.0
2.0
1.4
9.0
5.3
9.5
2.5
5.3
8.0
8.0
2.2
5.6
5.3
24.5
7.2
8.4
2.1
4.5
5.7
5.8
2.0
13.5
5.5
5.5
0.9
3.7
13.1
5.3
91.4
4.7
1.2
4.2
8.2
9.6

7.6
6.5
1.9
4.0
2.0
9.0
2.0
2.0
3.0
3.0
2.0
4.9
3.0
2.0
3.0
9.0
5.5
8.0
2.5
4.8
6.0
7.8
2.8
5.0
5.0
8.5
5.0
5.0
2.2
3.7
5.0
5.8
2.0
14.5
5.0
3.0
1.5
3.0
8.7
5.5
48.5
5.0
2.0
5.0
8.0
3.9

End of Period2
Projections
2017 2018 2019
10.1
23.7
3.0
3.2
2.1
10.5
0.3
0.8
4.2
7.2
2.9
55.0
1.8
1.1
–0.2
9.0
4.7
13.6
1.1
6.9
11.8
9.5
–1.3
4.5
4.9
13.9
9.0
7.1
1.1
4.2
7.2
5.2
4.8
15.4
0.7
7.7
–0.7
3.5
15.3
4.7
117.7
4.0
–1.6
3.3
6.1
3.5

8.8
20.0
1.7
4.4
2.0
5.3
1.0
1.0
3.6
–2.3
6.2
20.0
2.1
2.0
1.3
9.0
5.5
10.5
2.8
5.5
8.0
8.0
2.0
6.9
7.0
27.0
7.7
9.0
2.0
5.9
6.5
2.9
2.4
12.9
5.0
6.0
0.8
5.2
15.0
5.3
99.4
4.3
1.5
4.3
8.5
6.3

8.2
12.0
2.8
3.6
2.0
9.0
1.6
1.1
3.4
5.4
2.8
14.8
2.4
2.0
1.5
9.0
4.9
8.0
2.5
5.0
8.0
8.0
2.3
5.0
5.0
22.0
6.4
7.8
2.1
4.7
5.5
5.8
2.0
13.0
6.0
5.0
1.7
3.8
13.0
5.3
92.7
5.0
2.0
4.5
8.0
10.9

1Movements

in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3For many countries, inflation for the earlier years is measured on the basis of a retail price index. Consumer price index (CPI) inflation data with broader and more up-to-date coverage are
typically used for more recent years.
4Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in the group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic
structure.
5Starting in 2014 data exclude Crimea and Sevastopol.
6Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
7Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina starting from 2017 onward.
8See country-specific notes for Argentina, Libya, and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
9Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
10Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
11The Zimbabwe dollar ceased circulating in early 2009. Data are based on IMF staff estimates of price and exchange rate developments in US dollars. IMF staff estimates of US dollar values may
differ from authorities’ estimates.
2Monthly

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

163

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt1
(Percent of GDP unless noted otherwise)

Major Advanced Economies
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
United States
Net Lending/Borrowing3
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
Euro Area
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
Germany
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
France
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
Italy
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2,4
Net Debt
Gross Debt
Japan
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt5
United Kingdom
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
Canada
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt6
Gross Debt

Average
2000–09

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Projections
2019

2023

–4.0
0.0
–3.8

–6.3
–2.0
–5.2

–4.1
–1.7
–3.7

–3.4
–1.3
–3.0

–2.8
–0.6
–2.7

–3.1
–0.6
–3.1

–3.0
0.0
–3.0

–3.2
0.6
–3.5

–3.3
1.0
–3.7

–2.9
0.6
–3.2

–4.2
0.2
–3.7
45.3
65.4

–7.6
–2.3
–6.1
80.3
103.3

–4.1
–1.9
–4.0
80.8
104.9

–3.7
–1.2
–3.4
80.4
104.6

–3.2
–0.1
–3.2
80.1
104.8

–3.9
–0.2
–3.9
81.2
106.8

–3.8
0.2
–4.0
78.8
105.2

–4.7
1.1
–5.1
77.7
106.1

–5.0
1.6
–5.6
77.9
107.8

–4.5
0.9
–4.8
83.7
117.0

–2.5
0.7
–3.0
55.2
68.8

–3.7
–1.8
–2.2
72.1
89.6

–3.0
–2.6
–1.3
74.6
91.5

–2.5
–2.3
–1.1
74.8
91.7

–2.0
–1.7
–1.0
73.8
89.8

–1.5
–1.2
–0.8
73.7
88.8

–0.9
–0.2
–0.7
71.8
86.6

–0.6
0.3
–0.7
69.5
84.4

–0.6
0.6
–1.0
67.7
82.0

–0.9
0.4
–1.2
61.8
74.5

–2.2
–0.3
–2.2
52.3
63.9

0.0
0.5
–0.1
58.4
79.8

–0.1
–0.3
0.2
57.6
77.5

0.6
0.1
0.9
54.1
74.6

0.8
0.1
0.8
51.1
70.9

0.9
0.2
1.0
48.2
67.9

1.0
0.9
0.9
44.9
63.9

1.5
1.2
1.0
41.5
59.8

1.5
1.4
0.7
38.3
56.0

0.8
0.7
0.4
29.4
44.6

–3.2
0.5
–3.6
56.7
65.6

–5.0
–0.6
–4.5
80.0
90.6

–4.1
–0.9
–3.4
83.0
93.4

–3.9
–0.9
–3.3
85.5
94.9

–3.6
–0.9
–2.9
86.4
95.6

–3.6
–0.9
–2.8
87.5
96.6

–2.6
0.0
–2.5
87.5
96.8

–2.6
0.1
–2.4
87.4
96.7

–2.8
0.3
–2.8
87.2
96.5

–2.8
0.3
–3.0
84.6
93.9

–3.3
0.1
–4.0
94.9
103.2

–2.9
–2.8
–1.5
111.6
123.4

–2.9
–4.1
–0.6
116.7
129.0

–3.0
–4.1
–1.0
118.8
131.8

–2.6
–3.2
–0.7
119.5
131.5

–2.5
–2.6
–1.3
119.5
132.0

–2.3
–1.5
–1.6
119.5
131.8

–1.7
–0.8
–1.3
118.3
130.3

–1.7
–0.3
–1.5
117.0
128.7

–2.2
0.0
–2.2
114.4
125.1

–6.3
–1.3
–5.9
93.6
168.9

–8.6
–3.7
–7.4
146.7
229.0

–7.9
–2.2
–7.3
146.4
232.5

–5.6
–2.6
–5.3
148.5
236.1

–3.8
–2.0
–4.2
147.6
231.3

–3.7
–1.8
–4.1
152.8
235.6

–4.3
–0.8
–4.1
154.9
237.6

–3.7
–0.3
–3.6
155.7
238.2

–2.8
0.1
–2.8
154.8
236.6

–2.0
0.0
–2.0
153.8
235.4

–3.0
0.9
–3.7
36.7
41.6

–7.6
–2.0
–6.0
75.5
84.1

–5.3
–1.8
–3.9
76.8
85.2

–5.4
–0.7
–4.6
78.8
87.0

–4.2
–0.1
–4.0
79.3
87.9

–2.9
–0.1
–2.9
78.8
87.9

–1.8
0.0
–1.8
77.9
87.5

–2.0
0.0
–2.0
78.0
87.4

–1.7
0.0
–1.7
77.6
87.2

–0.8
0.0
–0.8
74.5
84.0

0.5
0.5
0.2
31.3
74.6

–2.5
–0.5
–2.3
28.3
84.8

–1.5
0.0
–1.5
29.3
85.8

0.2
0.8
–0.5
28.0
85.0

–0.1
–0.2
0.0
27.7
90.5

–1.1
–0.9
–0.7
28.5
91.1

–1.1
0.1
–1.2
27.7
89.7

–1.2
0.2
–1.4
27.7
87.3

–1.1
0.3
–1.3
27.2
84.7

–0.9
0.0
–0.9
25.3
76.6

Note: The methodology and specific assumptions for each country are discussed in Box A1. The country group composites for fiscal data are calculated as the sum of the US dollar values
for the relevant individual countries.
1Debt data refer to the end of the year and are not always comparable across countries. Gross and net debt levels reported by national statistical agencies for countries that have adopted the
System of National Accounts (SNA) 2008 (Australia, Canada, Hong Kong SAR, United States) are adjusted to exclude unfunded pension liabilities of government employees’ defined-benefit
pension plans. Fiscal data for the aggregated major advanced economies and the United States start in 2001, and the average for the aggregate and the United States is therefore for the
period 2001–07.
2Percent of potential GDP.
3Figures reported by the national statistical agency are adjusted to exclude items related to the accrual-basis accounting of government employees’ defined-benefit pension plans.
4Excludes one-time measures based on the authorities’ data and, if unavailable, on receipts from the sale of assets.
5Nonconsolidated basis.
6Includes equity shares.

164

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices
(Annual percent change)
Averages
2000–09
2010–19
Trade in Goods and Services
World Trade1
Volume
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
In SDRs
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Trade in Goods
World Trade1
Volume
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
In SDRs
World Trade Prices in US Dollars2
Manufactures
Oil
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
Food
Beverages
Agricultural Raw Materials
Metal
World Trade Prices in SDRs2
Manufactures
Oil
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
Food
Beverages
Agricultural Raw Materials
Metal
World Trade Prices in Euros2
Manufactures
Oil
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
Food
Beverages
Agricultural Raw Materials
Metal

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Projections
2018
2019

5.0

4.8

12.5

7.2

3.0

3.6

3.8

2.8

2.2

5.2

4.2

4.0

3.4
2.1

0.3
1.2

5.5
6.6

11.0
7.3

–1.7
1.3

–0.7
0.1

–1.8
–1.7

–13.2
–5.8

–4.1
–3.5

4.2
4.5

5.4
2.9

0.4
1.3

3.9
8.0

4.4
5.5

12.1
13.8

6.1
8.9

2.9
3.5

3.2
4.7

3.9
3.2

3.8
1.6

1.8
3.0

4.4
6.9

3.4
4.7

3.1
4.8

3.6
9.1

4.4
5.8

11.6
14.2

5.3
11.6

1.7
5.3

2.5
5.1

3.9
4.2

4.8
–0.9

2.4
1.8

4.2
7.0

3.7
6.0

4.0
4.8

–0.2
1.4

0.1
0.1

–0.8
1.7

–1.5
4.0

–0.7
0.6

0.9
–0.6

0.3
–0.6

1.9
–4.3

1.0
–1.4

–0.2
0.6

–0.1
1.6

0.1
–0.2

4.9

4.8

14.4

7.4

2.8

3.2

2.9

2.0

2.1

5.4

4.4

4.1

3.3
2.0

0.3
1.2

6.5
7.6

12.2
8.4

–1.9
1.1

–1.2
–0.4

–2.3
–2.3

–14.2
–6.9

–4.9
–4.2

5.0
5.2

5.8
3.3

0.3
1.2

1.7
13.1
5.3
5.5
5.2
0.1
9.4

0.3
1.1
1.2
1.3
–1.2
2.1
0.8

2.2
27.9
26.7
12.3
14.1
33.2
48.2

4.1
31.6
18.1
20.5
16.6
22.7
13.5

2.7
1.0
–10.2
–2.9
–18.6
–12.7
–16.8

–3.0
–0.9
–1.5
0.4
–11.9
1.6
–4.3

–0.5
–7.5
–3.9
–4.1
20.7
2.0
–10.1

–2.3
–47.2
–17.6
–17.4
–3.1
–13.5
–23.0

–5.2
–15.7
–1.5
2.7
–5.0
–5.7
–5.4

1.7
23.3
6.8
2.2
–9.3
2.3
22.2

2.5
31.4
2.7
2.3
–5.7
1.5
5.3

1.6
–0.9
–0.7
1.7
–2.7
–1.5
–3.6

0.5
11.8
4.1
4.2
4.0
–1.1
8.1

1.3
2.0
2.1
2.3
–0.3
3.1
1.8

3.2
29.3
28.0
13.5
15.3
34.6
49.8

0.6
27.2
14.2
16.5
12.7
18.5
9.7

5.9
4.1
–7.4
0.1
–16.1
–10.0
–14.3

–2.2
–0.1
–0.7
1.2
–11.2
2.4
–3.5

–0.4
–7.5
–3.9
–4.1
20.8
2.0
–10.1

6.1
–42.7
–10.5
–10.3
5.2
–6.1
–16.4

–4.6
–15.1
–0.9
3.4
–4.4
–5.1
–4.8

1.9
23.6
7.0
2.5
–9.0
2.5
22.5

0.2
28.3
0.3
0.0
–7.9
–0.8
2.9

2.5
0.1
0.3
2.7
–1.8
–0.6
–2.7

–1.0
10.2
2.6
2.7
2.5
–2.6
6.6

2.1
2.9
2.9
3.1
0.5
3.9
2.6

7.2
34.3
32.9
17.9
19.8
39.8
55.5

–0.7
25.5
12.7
14.9
11.2
17.0
8.3

11.2
9.3
–2.8
5.1
–11.9
–5.5
–10.0

–6.1
–4.1
–4.6
–2.8
–14.7
–1.7
–7.3

–0.5
–7.6
–4.0
–4.2
20.7
1.9
–10.2

17.0
–36.8
–1.3
–1.1
16.1
3.6
–7.8

–4.9
–15.4
–1.3
3.0
–4.8
–5.5
–5.1

–0.4
20.8
4.6
0.2
–11.1
0.2
19.8

–2.4
25.1
–2.3
–2.6
–10.2
–3.4
0.2

2.9
0.4
0.6
3.1
–1.4
–0.2
–2.3

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

165

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Averages
2000–09 2010–19
Trade in Goods
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Fuel Exporters
Nonfuel Exporters
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Fuel Exporters
Nonfuel Exporters
Price Deflators in SDRs
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Fuel Exporters
Nonfuel Exporters
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Fuel Exporters
Nonfuel Exporters
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States3
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan
Middle East and North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Memorandum
World Exports in Billions of US Dollars
Goods and Services
Goods
Average Oil Price4
In US Dollars a Barrel
Export Unit Value of Manufactures5

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Projections
2018
2019

3.6
7.9
5.1
9.0

4.4
5.4
2.3
6.4

14.4
15.4
6.2
19.1

6.3
7.8
5.7
8.7

2.6
3.8
2.7
4.3

2.6
4.6
2.0
5.8

3.1
2.6
–0.2
3.8

2.7
1.2
3.4
0.4

1.5
2.9
2.2
3.1

4.2
6.6
0.7
8.1

3.6
4.5
–0.4
5.8

3.1
4.7
1.3
5.7

3.4
9.1
11.0
8.7

4.4
5.8
2.7
6.4

13.3
15.4
7.8
17.3

6.0
11.3
11.8
11.2

1.1
5.1
8.5
4.4

2.0
4.7
3.7
4.9

3.3
2.5
1.0
2.9

3.4
–0.8
–7.5
0.7

2.3
2.2
–5.2
3.7

4.7
7.2
2.9
8.1

4.2
6.3
4.6
6.6

4.3
4.8
0.6
5.5

1.3
4.6
9.0
2.8

1.0
1.8
1.8
1.6

4.7
12.3
21.9
8.6

6.1
13.1
25.7
8.1

–0.4
3.1
4.4
2.4

0.3
–1.2
–2.5
–0.6

–1.8
–3.1
–6.9
–1.4

–6.0
–8.9
–30.1
–0.7

–2.1
–7.3
–13.5
–5.5

4.7
6.6
16.6
4.1

3.4
4.1
16.0
1.0

1.3
1.1
0.8
1.1

1.6
2.7
3.3
2.6

0.9
1.6
1.5
1.7

6.1
11.1
8.5
11.7

8.0
8.2
6.4
8.6

0.7
2.5
3.2
2.4

–0.5
–0.7
0.0
–0.9

–2.0
–2.6
–2.3
–2.7

–7.8
–4.5
–3.1
–4.9

–3.5
–5.7
–3.8
–6.1

4.6
5.6
3.3
6.0

3.2
2.6
1.4
2.8

1.2
1.3
1.7
1.3

–0.3
1.8

0.1
0.1

–1.3
1.2

–1.8
4.5

–1.1
0.5

0.9
–0.5

0.2
–0.4

2.0
–4.5

1.4
–1.7

0.1
1.0

0.3
1.5

0.1
–0.3

3.6
–0.9
1.6
2.3

0.5
–0.1
–0.8
0.0

12.7
–6.6
–5.4
7.2

20.9
–2.7
0.0
5.2

1.6
1.4
–1.1
–1.8

–6.6
1.1
2.1
–1.3

–1.9
2.5
0.9
–2.4

–22.0
8.7
–0.4
–9.0

–13.5
0.1
0.6
1.2

10.7
–3.4
–2.8
4.5

12.3
–1.6
–1.2
–1.0

–1.1
0.5
–0.3
–1.7

5.0
5.3
3.6

–0.1
–0.1
0.9

8.5
8.4
12.3

12.7
12.9
12.3

–0.1
0.5
–1.4

–0.1
–0.1
–2.0

–4.6
–4.7
–3.3

–25.8
–26.5
–15.4

–6.2
–6.8
–0.1

10.0
10.3
7.0

11.5
11.9
4.0

–0.7
–0.5
–1.4

5.6
0.3

0.4
0.0

12.4
–2.8

18.1
–0.5

1.2
0.1

–2.5
0.3

–4.7
1.3

–27.9
4.4

–10.1
0.6

12.9
–1.8

14.4
–1.7

–0.9
–0.1

12,367
9,794
13.1
49.17
1.7

22,609
17,666
1.1
77.29
0.3

18,728 22,307 22,608 23,323 23,749 21,097 20,692 22,713
14,900 17,929 18,130 18,546 18,629 16,200 15,732 17,400
27.9
31.6
1.0
–0.9
–7.5
–47.2
–15.7
23.3
79.03 104.01 105.01 104.07
96.25
50.79
42.84
52.81
2.2
4.1
2.7
–3.0
–0.5
–2.3
–5.2
1.7

1Average

24,921 25,947
19,208 19,985
31.4
–0.9
69.38 68.76
2.5
1.6

of annual percent change for world exports and imports.
represented, respectively, by the export unit value index for manufactures of the advanced economies and accounting for 83 percent of the advanced economies’ trade (export of goods)
weights; the average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices; and the average of world market prices for nonfuel primary commodities weighted by their 2002–04
shares in world commodity exports.
3Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic
structure.
4Percent change of average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices.
5Percent change for manufactures exported by the advanced economies.
2As

166

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
(Billions of US dollars)

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Russia
Excluding Russia
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India
ASEAN-53
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan
Sub-Saharan Africa
South Africa
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2013–17
Memorandum
World
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa

Projections
2019

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

–1.7
–431.3
–7.7
192.3
–16.7
–72.6
–56.2
221.0
–82.9
–58.2
283.4
278.5

–35.9
–445.7
–12.4
229.7
–24.6
–68.3
–47.4
129.8
–51.6
–49.6
266.0
375.8

23.3
–426.8
174.1
248.9
–25.9
–7.0
–3.1
59.7
–100.9
–65.7
272.2
355.3

218.9
–348.8
293.1
252.5
–14.3
21.3
20.7
45.9
–141.9
–59.4
347.5
178.7

244.7
–365.2
331.8
291.0
–27.3
41.3
14.9
36.8
–149.6
–43.2
360.4
173.9

299.0
–407.8
377.1
301.2
–9.0
27.8
13.5
136.4
–142.4
–55.9
366.6
–58.3

333.7
–432.9
429.4
297.5
–18.5
47.6
23.8
194.9
–139.3
–49.3
348.3
–72.8

439.8
–449.1
436.5
291.0
–14.8
53.4
24.7
196.1
–99.2
–48.8
356.8
–14.0

380.4
–515.7
417.9
326.9
–25.6
41.3
16.6
183.7
–99.2
–52.2
370.4
–7.4

259.8
–652.1
407.3
323.6
–19.9
33.6
17.3
196.2
–90.3
–45.6
367.2
–4.2

219.1
–809.6
439.0
359.2
–3.3
18.8
25.4
245.0
–93.0
–48.0
394.3
–340.8

68.9
67.5
1.4
232.6
237.8
–47.9
45.4
–86.8
–96.0
–75.8
–5.2

107.3
97.3
10.0
97.4
136.1
–78.2
49.6
–119.4
–111.6
–77.0
–12.5

67.5
71.3
–3.8
121.2
215.4
–87.8
6.3
–81.8
–136.7
–74.2
–18.6

17.9
33.4
–15.5
99.3
148.2
–32.3
–3.5
–71.9
–163.4
–74.8
–31.0

57.6
57.5
0.1
231.8
236.0
–26.8
22.5
–59.7
–184.9
–104.2
–24.0

53.1
67.7
–14.6
312.1
304.2
–22.1
30.9
–35.2
–173.3
–59.4
–29.8

0.8
24.4
–23.6
228.7
202.2
–14.4
43.2
–32.7
–95.0
–23.5
–23.3

23.5
35.4
–12.0
151.2
164.9
–48.7
45.9
–49.4
–82.1
–9.8
–19.4

86.4
97.1
–10.7
28.2
97.5
–80.4
31.2
–53.2
–85.6
–24.8
–15.3

73.9
85.6
–11.7
32.3
98.4
–74.0
26.0
–26.1
–92.9
–30.9
–16.0

49.7
61.0
–11.3
–104.8
17.5
–112.3
3.2
–49.4
–127.1
–44.7
–24.0

170.2
–10.4
–5.6

410.7
–8.7
–9.2

411.8
–26.7
–20.3

332.5
–35.7
–21.2

191.8
–62.6
–17.8

–123.1
–91.8
–14.6

–119.5
–55.1
–8.2

–21.4
–35.8
–8.6

62.9
–46.1
–12.1

67.3
–58.8
–13.5

–27.6
–81.6
–16.5

309.5
–29.4
–11.5

619.9
–244.0
–28.6

597.0
–241.7
–64.6

465.5
–286.7
–82.9

311.6
–137.7
–55.4

–78.1
19.8
–62.5

–76.5
3.7
–41.3

74.8
–88.8
–55.3

228.7
–236.1
–55.5

220.6
–224.8
–57.2

99.0
–439.8
–63.3

–262.6

–348.5

–401.9

–374.5

–369.8

–339.9

–257.9

–276.3

–351.7

–340.9

–457.2

–23.3

–37.0

–55.0

–54.4

–39.2

–49.0

–52.7

–44.2

–40.1

–44.5

–59.1

276.7
–9.4
–16.6
169.7

339.9
77.0
–22.8
405.8

378.6
206.6
–32.8
414.3

397.6
287.1
–39.7
335.0

418.7
304.4
–43.9
193.7

240.6
310.8
–77.5
–120.9

260.8
324.9
–42.5
–116.1

425.8
433.3
–35.5
–9.9

373.0
429.0
–53.8
80.1

255.6
424.4
–65.0
83.0

–121.7
459.6
–88.4
–1.2

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

167

2023

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of GDP)

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Emerging Market and Developing
Economies
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Russia
Excluding Russia
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India
ASEAN-53
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan
Sub-Saharan Africa
South Africa
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2013–17
Memorandum
World
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa

168

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Projections
2019

2023

0.0
–2.9
–0.1
5.6
–0.6
–3.4
–3.9
3.9
–3.4
–3.6
5.0

–0.1
–2.9
–0.1
6.1
–0.9
–3.0
–3.2
2.1
–2.0
–2.8
4.1

0.1
–2.6
1.4
7.0
–1.0
–0.3
–0.2
1.0
–3.8
–3.6
4.1

0.5
–2.1
2.2
6.7
–0.5
1.0
1.5
0.9
–5.1
–3.2
5.1

0.5
–2.1
2.5
7.5
–1.0
1.9
1.1
0.8
–4.9
–2.4
5.2

0.7
–2.2
3.2
8.9
–0.4
1.5
1.1
3.1
–4.9
–3.6
5.8

0.7
–2.3
3.6
8.5
–0.8
2.6
1.9
3.9
–5.2
–3.2
5.4

0.9
–2.3
3.5
7.9
–0.6
2.8
1.9
4.0
–3.8
–2.9
5.1

0.7
–2.5
3.0
8.1
–0.9
2.0
1.2
3.6
–3.5
–3.0
5.0

0.5
–3.0
2.9
7.9
–0.7
1.6
1.2
3.8
–3.2
–2.5
4.8

0.4
–3.3
2.6
7.3
–0.1
0.8
1.4
4.1
–2.9
–2.1
4.3

1.2

1.4

1.3

0.6

0.6

–0.2

–0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

–0.7

3.2
4.1
0.3
2.4
3.9
–2.8
2.7
–5.0
–1.9
–3.4
–0.5

4.0
4.7
1.7
0.8
1.8
–4.3
2.6
–6.3
–1.9
–2.9
–1.1

2.4
3.2
–0.6
0.9
2.5
–4.8
0.3
–4.4
–2.3
–3.0
–1.5

0.6
1.5
–2.2
0.7
1.5
–1.7
–0.2
–3.6
–2.7
–3.0
–2.4

2.1
2.8
0.0
1.5
2.2
–1.3
1.1
–2.9
–3.1
–4.2
–1.8

2.8
4.9
–2.7
2.0
2.7
–1.1
1.5
–1.9
–3.3
–3.3
–2.5

0.0
1.9
–5.1
1.4
1.8
–0.6
2.0
–1.8
–1.9
–1.3
–2.2

1.1
2.2
–2.4
0.9
1.4
–1.9
2.0
–2.6
–1.5
–0.5
–1.7

4.1
6.2
–1.9
0.1
0.7
–3.0
1.3
–2.8
–1.6
–1.3
–1.3

3.3
5.2
–2.0
0.2
0.7
–2.5
1.0
–1.4
–1.8
–1.6
–1.3

1.9
3.4
–1.5
–0.4
0.1
–2.6
0.1
–1.9
–2.0
–1.9
–1.6

6.1
–0.8
–1.5

12.7
–0.6
–2.2

12.5
–1.7
–5.1

9.8
–2.2
–5.8

5.5
–3.6
–5.1

–4.0
–6.0
–4.6

–3.9
–3.9
–2.8

–0.7
–2.3
–2.5

1.8
–2.8
–3.2

1.9
–3.4
–3.5

–0.6
–3.4
–3.6

6.4
–0.2
–0.8

10.5
–1.2
–1.7

9.6
–1.1
–3.5

7.3
–1.2
–4.4

5.0
–0.6
–3.0

–1.6
0.1
–3.4

–1.7
0.0
–2.4

1.5
–0.3
–2.9

4.3
–0.8
–3.0

4.1
–0.8
–3.1

1.5
–1.1
–2.8

–2.3

–2.7

–3.1

–2.7

–2.6

–2.7

–2.0

–2.0

–2.5

–2.3

–2.3

–3.4

–4.8

–6.7

–6.2

–4.5

–5.7

–6.2

–5.7

–4.9

–4.9

–4.9

0.4
–0.1
–1.3
6.6

0.5
0.4
–1.5
13.5

0.5
1.2
–2.0
13.5

0.5
1.6
–2.2
10.7

0.5
1.6
–2.3
6.0

0.3
1.9
–4.2
–4.3

0.3
2.0
–2.4
–4.2

0.5
2.5
–1.9
–0.3

0.4
2.3
–2.7
2.6

0.3
2.2
–3.0
2.6

–0.1
2.0
–2.9
0.0

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of exports of goods and services)

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Emerging Market and Developing
Economies
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Russia
Excluding Russia
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India
ASEAN-53
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan
Sub-Saharan Africa
South Africa
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2013–17
Memorandum
World
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa
1Excludes
2Georgia,

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Projections
2019

2023

0.0
–23.3
–0.3
13.3
–2.3
–13.5
–15.3
25.4
–12.0
–12.4
8.6

–0.3
–21.0
–0.4
13.6
–3.0
–11.1
–11.0
13.9
–6.4
–9.1
6.8

0.2
–19.2
5.4
15.3
–3.2
–1.2
–0.8
6.5
–12.6
–11.9
6.8

1.5
–15.2
8.6
14.8
–1.7
3.5
4.7
5.5
–17.3
–10.7
8.4

1.6
–15.4
9.3
16.3
–3.1
6.5
3.3
4.3
–17.5
–7.6
8.7

2.2
–18.0
11.7
19.0
–1.2
5.1
3.4
17.4
–17.9
–11.4
9.9

2.5
–19.5
13.3
18.5
–2.4
8.6
5.8
24.0
–18.5
–10.4
9.6

3.0
–19.1
12.3
16.7
–1.8
8.8
5.5
22.4
–12.5
–9.5
9.1

2.4
–20.4
...
17.3
–2.9
6.2
3.4
19.5
–11.7
–9.6
8.7

1.6
–24.9
...
16.5
–2.1
4.9
3.4
20.3
–10.7
–8.0
8.3

1.1
–27.8
...
15.0
–0.3
2.4
3.9
23.6
–10.2
–7.1
7.4

4.0

4.5

3.9

2.0

2.2

–0.6

–0.9

–0.2

–0.1

–0.1

–2.9

10.3
15.3
0.6
8.3
14.8
–12.6
6.1
–14.8
–9.6
–32.7
–1.7

12.1
17.0
3.2
2.8
6.8
–17.2
5.5
–17.2
–9.0
–26.3
–3.4

7.4
12.1
–1.2
3.3
9.9
–19.4
0.7
–11.8
–10.7
–26.4
–4.8

2.0
5.6
–5.1
2.6
6.3
–6.9
–0.4
–9.7
–12.9
–26.8
–7.8

6.8
10.2
0.0
5.8
9.6
–5.6
2.3
–7.6
–14.9
–39.5
–5.7

9.0
17.2
–7.5
8.2
12.9
–5.3
3.4
–5.0
–16.0
–26.5
–7.4

0.2
7.3
–13.6
6.2
9.2
–3.2
4.7
–4.5
–9.0
–10.8
–5.8

3.8
8.6
–5.8
3.7
6.8
–9.7
4.4
–6.1
–7.0
–3.9
–4.4

11.6
19.5
–4.4
0.6
3.7
–14.4
2.7
–5.8
–6.8
–9.2
–3.2

9.7
16.9
–4.6
0.7
3.6
–12.0
2.1
–2.7
–7.1
–11.1
–3.1

5.9
11.2
–3.8
–1.8
0.6
–12.8
0.2
–4.0
–7.9
–13.7
–3.7

13.6
–2.7
–5.2

26.8
–1.8
–7.3

24.3
–5.6
–17.3

20.9
–7.4
–18.7

13.7
–13.8
–16.1

–9.9
–26.6
–15.2

–10.6
–17.5
–9.1

–2.0
–9.7
–8.3

4.5
–11.0
–11.0

4.6
–13.4
–12.0

–1.8
–15.8
–12.5

16.5
–0.6
–2.9

25.3
–4.2
–5.9

22.6
–4.0
–13.5

18.4
–4.5
–17.6

13.8
–2.1
–12.1

–4.2
0.3
–16.0

–4.9
0.1
–10.7

4.2
–1.4
–12.6

11.2
–3.3
–11.8

10.7
–3.0
–11.7

4.8
–4.6
–10.6

–8.7

–9.5

–10.8

–9.8

–9.6

–10.0

–7.7

–7.3

–8.3

–7.5

–7.7

–10.9

–14.7

–22.1

–21.9

–16.9

–25.4

–30.0

–22.3

–17.5

–17.8

–18.5

1.4
–0.1
–4.5
13.9

1.5
1.0
–4.8
27.1

1.6
2.8
–6.8
25.0

1.7
3.7
–7.7
21.5

1.8
3.8
–8.3
14.1

1.2
4.3
–16.2
–10.0

1.3
4.5
–8.9
–10.6

1.9
5.5
–6.3
–1.1

1.5
4.9
–8.3
5.8

1.0
4.7
–9.1
5.9

–0.4
4.2
–8.4
0.0

the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic

structure.
3Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

169

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table A11. Advanced Economies: Balance on Current Account
(Percent of GDP)

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area1
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Netherlands
Belgium
Austria
Greece
Portugal
Ireland
Finland
Slovak Republic
Lithuania
Slovenia
Luxembourg
Latvia
Estonia
Cyprus
Malta
Japan
United Kingdom
Korea
Canada
Australia
Taiwan Province of China
Switzerland
Sweden
Singapore
Hong Kong SAR
Norway
Czech Republic
Israel
Denmark
New Zealand
Puerto Rico
Macao SAR
Iceland
San Marino
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Euro Area2
1Data
2Data

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Projections
2019

2023

0.0
–2.9
–0.1
5.6
–0.6
–3.4
–3.9
7.3
1.8
2.9
–11.4
–10.1
–1.2
1.1
–4.7
–1.3
–0.1
6.7
2.0
1.8
–11.3
–4.7
3.9
–3.4
2.6
–3.6
–3.7
8.3
14.8
6.0
23.4
7.0
10.9
–3.6
3.9
6.6
–2.3
...
39.4
–6.4
...

–0.1
–2.9
–0.1
6.1
–0.9
–3.0
–3.2
9.0
–1.1
1.6
–10.0
–6.0
–1.6
–1.7
–5.0
–4.5
0.2
6.0
–3.2
1.3
–4.1
–0.2
2.1
–2.0
1.6
–2.8
–3.1
7.8
7.9
5.6
22.1
5.6
12.4
–2.1
2.1
6.6
–2.8
...
40.9
–5.1
...

0.1
–2.6
1.4
7.0
–1.0
–0.3
–0.2
10.7
–0.1
1.5
–3.8
–1.8
–2.6
–2.3
0.9
–1.4
2.1
5.6
–3.6
–1.9
–6.0
1.7
1.0
–3.8
4.2
–3.6
–4.3
8.9
10.3
5.6
17.0
1.6
12.5
–1.6
0.5
6.3
–3.9
...
39.3
–3.8
...

0.5
–2.1
2.2
6.7
–0.5
1.0
1.5
9.7
–0.3
1.9
–2.0
1.6
1.5
–1.9
1.9
0.8
4.4
5.5
–2.7
0.5
–4.9
2.7
0.9
–5.1
6.2
–3.2
–3.4
10.0
11.3
5.2
16.5
1.5
10.3
–0.5
3.0
7.8
–3.2
...
40.2
5.8
...

0.5
–2.1
2.5
7.5
–1.0
1.9
1.1
8.5
–0.9
2.5
–1.6
0.1
1.1
–1.5
1.1
3.2
5.8
5.2
–1.7
0.3
–4.3
8.8
0.8
–4.9
6.0
–2.4
–3.1
11.5
8.5
4.5
18.7
1.4
10.5
0.2
4.4
8.9
–3.2
...
34.2
3.9
...

0.7
–2.2
3.2
8.9
–0.4
1.5
1.1
6.3
–0.1
1.9
–0.2
0.1
4.4
–0.9
–1.7
–2.8
4.5
5.1
–0.5
2.0
–1.5
4.5
3.1
–4.9
7.7
–3.6
–4.6
14.2
10.8
4.5
18.6
3.3
7.9
0.2
5.3
8.8
–3.1
...
25.3
5.2
...

0.7
–2.3
3.6
8.5
–0.8
2.6
1.9
8.0
0.1
2.1
–1.1
0.6
–4.2
–0.3
–1.5
–1.1
5.5
5.1
1.4
1.9
–4.9
7.0
3.9
–5.2
7.0
–3.2
–3.3
13.7
9.4
4.3
19.0
4.0
3.8
1.6
3.8
7.3
–2.3
...
27.0
7.5
...

0.9
–2.3
3.5
7.9
–0.6
2.8
1.9
10.5
–0.2
1.9
–0.8
0.5
8.5
0.7
–2.1
0.8
7.1
5.0
–0.8
3.1
–6.7
13.6
4.0
–3.8
5.1
–2.9
–2.6
14.5
9.8
3.3
18.8
4.3
5.5
1.1
2.9
7.6
–2.7
...
33.3
3.5
...

0.7
–2.5
3.0
8.1
–0.9
2.0
1.2
9.9
0.1
2.2
–0.8
0.0
7.4
0.9
–1.8
0.3
6.3
4.9
–2.0
2.2
–3.1
11.6
3.6
–3.5
5.0
–3.0
–2.8
13.8
10.2
2.6
18.5
3.4
7.8
–0.4
2.3
7.7
–3.6
...
35.9
2.4
...

0.5
–3.0
2.9
7.9
–0.7
1.6
1.2
9.7
–0.1
1.8
–0.4
–0.3
6.7
0.9
–0.9
0.0
5.5
4.8
–2.6
1.1
–5.2
11.1
3.8
–3.2
4.7
–2.5
–3.1
13.6
9.8
2.8
18.3
3.1
7.8
–0.9
2.3
7.5
–3.8
...
38.1
2.0
...

0.4
–3.3
2.6
7.3
–0.1
0.8
1.4
8.3
0.2
2.0
0.0
–1.5
5.0
1.1
0.2
–2.3
2.6
4.6
–3.4
–2.4
–3.6
10.6
4.1
–2.9
4.1
–2.1
–2.7
10.5
9.3
3.0
15.9
3.4
7.1
–1.9
2.9
6.3
–3.8
...
41.0
2.2
...

–0.8
0.5

–0.8
0.8

–0.9
2.3

–0.7
2.8

–0.6
3.0

–0.4
3.4

–0.3
3.4

–0.2
3.8

–0.4
3.6

–0.6
3.5

–0.7
3.2

corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions.
calculated as the sum of the balances of individual euro area countries.

170

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account
(Percent of GDP)

Commonwealth of Independent States1
Russia
Excluding Russia
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Georgia
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyz Republic
Moldova
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Ukraine2
Uzbekistan
Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
Fiji
India
Indonesia
Kiribati
Lao P.D.R.
Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nauru
Nepal
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vietnam
Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Hungary
Kosovo
FYR Macedonia
Montenegro
Poland
Romania
Serbia
Turkey

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Projections
2019

2023

3.2
4.1
0.3
–13.6
28.4
–14.5
–10.3
0.9
–2.2
–6.4
–9.6
–12.9
–2.2
7.0
2.4
0.4
–22.2
36.6
–14.9
3.9
–4.5
–2.8
0.7
–2.2
–16.5
10.1
–7.3
–17.8
–15.4
–13.0
–1.1
46.3
–2.4
–9.3
–20.4
3.6
–6.7
–32.9
–1.9
3.4
39.7
–18.5
–12.0
–5.9
–3.8
–5.0
–11.3
–6.1
–1.7
–1.1
0.3
–11.7
–2.0
–20.3
–5.4
–5.1
–6.4
–5.8

4.0
4.7
1.7
–10.4
26.0
–8.2
–12.8
5.3
–2.9
–10.0
–7.3
–0.8
–6.3
5.7
0.8
–1.0
–29.8
34.7
–11.9
1.8
–5.1
–4.3
0.2
–13.1
–15.3
10.9
–14.8
–2.1
–18.8
–26.5
–1.8
26.1
–1.0
–11.5
–24.0
2.5
–6.9
–8.3
–7.1
2.5
39.1
–13.2
–37.1
–7.8
0.2
–6.3
–13.2
–9.5
0.3
–0.7
0.7
–12.7
–2.5
–14.8
–5.2
–5.0
–8.6
–8.9

2.4
3.2
–0.6
–10.0
21.4
–2.8
–11.7
0.5
3.7
–6.5
–9.2
–0.9
–8.1
1.2
0.9
0.7
–21.4
29.8
–14.0
2.5
–1.4
–4.8
–2.7
–4.4
–26.0
5.2
–6.6
–6.2
–13.4
–27.4
–4.0
38.1
4.8
–11.5
–36.1
2.8
–9.0
1.7
–5.8
–0.4
39.7
–7.9
18.2
–6.5
6.0
–4.4
–10.1
–8.7
–0.9
–0.1
1.8
–5.8
–3.2
–15.3
–3.7
–4.8
–11.5
–5.5

0.6
1.5
–2.2
–7.3
16.6
–10.0
–5.8
0.5
–13.3
–4.2
–7.8
–7.3
–9.2
2.8
0.7
1.2
–25.4
20.9
–13.4
1.5
–9.7
–1.7
–3.2
8.3
–28.4
3.5
–4.3
–9.2
–10.1
–25.4
–4.9
18.8
3.3
–12.0
–30.8
4.2
–1.7
–3.4
–3.4
–1.2
42.3
–11.5
–6.6
–3.3
4.5
–3.6
–9.3
–5.3
1.3
0.9
3.8
–3.4
–1.6
–11.4
–1.3
–1.1
–6.1
–6.7

2.1
2.8
0.0
–7.6
13.9
–6.6
–10.7
2.8
–16.0
–4.5
–2.8
–6.1
–3.9
1.7
1.5
1.3
–26.4
31.9
–10.1
2.2
–6.2
–1.3
–3.1
25.0
–20.0
4.4
–3.2
–1.2
1.2
–11.3
–2.2
–13.5
4.5
–15.2
1.3
3.8
–8.1
–4.3
–2.5
3.7
27.0
–14.7
2.9
2.4
4.9
–2.9
–10.8
–7.4
0.1
2.0
1.5
–6.9
–0.5
–12.4
–2.1
–0.7
–6.0
–4.7

2.8
4.9
–2.7
–2.6
–0.4
–3.3
–12.0
–2.8
–16.0
–4.9
–6.0
–15.6
1.7
0.7
2.0
1.9
–28.3
16.7
–9.0
2.7
–2.2
–1.1
–2.0
46.7
–18.0
3.0
–7.4
15.0
4.2
–4.0
–5.1
–9.5
5.0
–7.7
12.0
2.5
–3.1
–3.0
–2.3
8.0
6.6
–12.0
–52.8
–10.7
–0.1
–1.9
–8.6
–5.4
0.0
4.5
3.5
–8.6
–2.0
–11.0
–0.6
–1.2
–4.7
–3.7

0.0
1.9
–5.1
–2.3
–3.6
–3.5
–12.8
–6.5
–11.6
–3.4
–5.2
–19.9
–1.5
0.6
1.4
0.6
–29.4
12.9
–8.6
1.8
–2.9
–0.6
–1.8
19.4
–13.0
2.4
–24.5
7.6
3.3
–6.3
–3.9
1.7
6.3
–11.7
24.1
–0.4
–4.7
–3.9
–2.1
11.7
–21.6
–6.9
23.2
–4.6
2.9
–1.8
–7.6
–4.9
2.3
2.6
6.0
–7.9
–2.7
–16.2
–0.3
–2.1
–3.1
–3.8

1.1
2.2
–2.4
–2.8
4.1
–1.7
–8.9
–3.4
–4.0
–6.3
–0.5
–11.5
–1.9
3.5
0.9
–2.0
–22.8
16.7
–8.5
1.4
–5.7
–1.9
–1.7
9.0
–12.1
3.0
–19.5
–0.3
3.6
–10.4
–4.3
4.1
–0.4
–18.1
24.5
–0.8
–2.3
–4.2
–2.6
11.2
–10.2
–11.6
4.2
–1.5
2.5
–2.6
–6.9
–4.8
4.5
3.9
3.2
–6.6
–1.3
–16.3
0.3
–3.4
–5.7
–5.6

4.1
6.2
–1.9
–3.8
6.6
–2.5
–10.5
–0.2
–12.3
–7.4
–4.7
–8.2
–3.1
–0.5
0.1
–3.2
–22.8
7.8
–10.8
0.7
–4.7
–3.0
–2.4
16.9
–13.9
2.9
–18.2
–0.6
3.2
–8.3
–5.3
–7.7
–8.2
–17.5
23.4
–1.5
–3.1
–6.4
–2.9
9.1
–1.2
–17.1
3.5
–8.5
2.2
–2.8
–7.1
–6.0
2.4
2.7
2.3
–7.2
–1.1
–16.8
–0.8
–3.5
–5.7
–5.7

3.3
5.2
–2.0
–3.8
8.1
–4.2
–10.2
0.2
–11.8
–6.3
–4.3
–6.4
–3.9
–1.5
0.2
–2.7
–15.0
17.4
–10.6
0.7
–4.0
–2.5
–2.4
7.1
–12.3
2.3
–15.2
–1.0
3.1
–10.8
–5.7
–7.5
–6.3
–17.2
23.6
–1.5
–4.5
–8.3
–2.7
8.1
–2.6
–14.1
–2.0
–7.6
2.0
–1.4
–6.6
–6.6
1.6
2.3
2.1
–6.6
–1.6
–16.0
–1.3
–3.4
–5.6
–1.4

1.9
3.4
–1.5
–4.7
9.6
–2.0
–8.6
0.6
–12.6
–5.7
–3.3
–5.9
–3.1
–2.6
–0.4
–0.9
2.9
15.7
–7.0
0.1
–3.3
–2.6
–2.2
–15.7
–8.7
1.7
–9.5
–3.1
3.2
0.7
–5.8
–6.0
–3.4
–13.3
19.9
–1.3
–4.5
–6.8
–2.1
4.2
–12.6
–6.3
–11.3
–6.4
1.5
–1.9
–6.2
–5.0
0.1
0.5
1.0
–5.2
–2.6
–8.3
–1.5
–3.0
–4.1
–2.4

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

171

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account (continued)
(Percent of GDP)

Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Aruba
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan
Afghanistan
Algeria
Bahrain
Djibouti
Egypt
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya3
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Sudan4
Syria5
Tunisia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen

172

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Projections
2019

2023

–1.9
...
–0.4
–19.4
–7.9
–5.6
–2.9
3.9
–3.4
1.4
–3.1
–3.2
...
–7.5
–2.3
–2.9
...
–1.4
–8.4
–1.5
–4.3
–8.0
–0.5
–8.9
–10.3
0.2
–2.4
...
...
...
14.9
18.5
...
1.9

–1.9
...
–1.0
–10.5
–10.9
–11.8
–1.1
0.3
–2.9
–1.6
–2.9
–5.3
...
–7.5
–0.5
–5.5
...
–3.4
–12.2
–4.3
–8.0
–12.2
–1.1
–11.9
–12.6
0.6
–1.8
...
...
...
9.8
16.9
...
4.9

–2.3
...
–0.4
3.5
–14.3
–8.5
–1.2
7.2
–3.0
–3.9
–3.1
–5.1
...
–6.5
–0.2
–5.8
...
–2.6
–11.3
–5.7
–8.5
–11.1
–1.5
–10.7
–10.0
–0.9
–2.8
...
...
...
3.3
13.0
–4.0
0.8

–2.7
...
–2.1
–12.9
–14.3
–8.4
–4.5
3.4
–3.0
–4.0
–3.3
–4.8
...
–4.1
–1.0
–6.9
...
–2.5
–13.3
–6.6
–9.5
–9.2
–2.4
–10.9
–9.4
1.6
–4.6
...
...
...
–3.8
20.1
–3.6
2.0

–3.1
2.0
–1.6
–5.2
–20.0
–9.2
–7.8
1.7
–4.2
–1.7
–5.2
–4.8
–7.1
–3.3
–0.5
–5.4
–4.4
–2.1
–9.5
–8.5
–6.9
–7.5
–1.8
–7.1
–13.1
–0.1
–4.4
–4.5
3.4
–25.7
–7.9
14.7
–3.2
2.3

–3.3
6.8
–2.7
4.1
–13.7
–6.1
–9.8
–5.8
–3.3
–2.3
–6.3
–3.5
–1.9
–1.9
–2.1
–3.2
–3.8
–0.2
–5.1
–3.1
–4.7
–3.2
–2.5
–9.1
–7.9
–0.8
–4.8
–9.1
6.9
–14.9
–16.3
7.6
–1.0
–6.6

–1.9
0.2
–2.7
5.0
–7.3
–4.3
–9.0
–5.6
–1.3
–1.4
–4.3
–2.3
0.8
–1.1
1.4
–2.1
–3.2
1.5
0.4
–1.0
–2.7
–2.7
–2.2
–7.5
–5.5
1.2
–2.7
–10.7
–1.9
–15.8
–5.2
–2.9
0.8
–1.6

–1.5
–7.3
–4.9
0.8
–15.7
–3.8
–7.7
–6.3
–0.5
–1.5
–3.3
–2.9
–12.5
–0.2
–0.3
–2.0
–6.8
1.5
–6.7
–4.0
–1.7
–4.6
–1.7
–5.0
–4.9
–0.8
–1.1
–10.1
1.3
–14.8
–0.1
10.2
1.5
2.0

–1.6
–13.8
–3.7
1.1
–12.7
–3.1
–6.0
–5.2
–1.3
–2.5
–2.4
–3.3
–32.7
–1.6
–0.5
–3.9
–7.5
1.0
–6.1
–4.0
–3.2
–4.9
–1.3
–6.2
–7.0
–1.3
–1.8
–9.9
–1.6
–13.3
–3.3
10.7
0.9
6.1

–1.8
–4.4
–3.2
0.7
–8.0
–3.4
–5.8
–5.1
–1.6
–2.7
–2.4
–3.5
–23.4
–2.1
0.7
–4.3
–7.5
0.4
–4.3
–2.9
–3.4
–4.2
–1.3
–6.4
–6.1
–0.9
–2.2
–15.8
–3.0
–12.3
–2.4
7.3
0.2
4.0

–2.0
–2.1
–3.5
0.8
–3.3
–2.7
–5.0
–4.7
–1.9
–1.8
–2.4
–4.5
–12.6
–2.7
1.2
–4.7
–6.8
–1.2
40.7
–2.7
–3.8
–1.2
–1.6
–6.8
–5.1
–0.2
–2.1
–16.0
–1.8
–9.1
–0.9
5.1
–1.3
0.0

6.1
29.4
7.5
3.0
2.8
–1.9
4.2
1.6
–7.1
31.8
–20.2
21.1
–8.2
–4.4
8.6
–2.2
19.1
12.6
...
–2.6
–2.8
–4.8
4.2
-3.4

12.7
26.6
9.9
8.8
–13.1
–2.5
10.4
10.9
–10.3
42.9
–15.2
9.9
–5.0
–7.6
13.0
0.1
31.1
23.6
...
–4.0
...
–7.4
12.6
-3.0

12.5
10.9
5.9
8.4
–18.8
–3.6
6.0
5.1
–15.2
45.5
–23.6
29.9
–24.1
–9.3
10.2
–2.1
33.2
22.4
...
–12.8
...
–8.3
19.7
-1.7

9.8
0.3
0.4
7.4
–23.3
–2.2
6.7
1.1
–10.4
40.3
–26.1
0.0
–22.0
–7.6
6.6
–1.1
30.4
18.1
–3.4
–11.0
...
–8.4
19.0
-3.1

5.5
5.8
–4.4
4.6
–25.1
–0.9
3.2
2.6
–7.3
33.4
–26.0
–78.4
–27.3
–5.9
5.2
–1.3
24.0
9.8
–5.2
–5.8
...
–9.1
13.5
-1.7

–4.0
2.9
–16.4
–2.4
–31.8
–3.7
0.3
–6.5
–9.1
3.5
–18.3
–54.4
–19.8
–2.1
–15.9
–1.0
8.5
–8.7
–4.7
–8.3
...
–8.9
4.9
-6.2

–3.9
7.3
–16.5
–4.6
–9.4
–6.0
4.0
–7.8
–9.5
–4.6
–21.7
–24.7
–15.1
–4.2
–18.7
–1.7
–5.5
–3.7
–6.3
–7.6
...
–8.8
3.7
-5.1

–0.7
5.0
–13.2
–4.5
–13.8
–6.3
2.2
2.3
–10.6
5.9
–22.8
8.4
–14.4
–3.6
–15.2
–4.1
3.8
2.2
–6.6
–10.5
...
–10.5
6.9
-4.0

1.8
5.1
–9.0
–2.5
–14.3
–2.6
1.3
6.9
–9.6
11.3
–25.6
1.5
–16.0
–4.3
–3.3
–5.9
4.8
8.4
–6.3
–14.2
...
–9.6
7.2
-9.3

1.9
0.8
–7.9
–2.3
–14.8
–2.4
0.3
3.1
–8.6
11.0
–25.5
2.9
–17.2
–4.5
–0.5
–5.3
6.6
8.8
–5.7
–13.1
...
–8.5
7.5
-7.4

–0.6
–5.2
–3.0
–3.6
–9.3
–1.2
–0.4
–4.9
–6.3
4.4
–21.3
–1.3
–6.5
–2.3
–4.4
–6.1
6.6
2.4
–6.4
–10.4
...
–6.0
4.2
-7.4

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account (continued)
(Percent of GDP)

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
South Sudan
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe6

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Projections
2019

–0.8
9.0
–8.2
–2.8
–2.2
–12.2
–12.4
–2.5
–10.2
–8.5
–0.4
–10.5
7.3
1.9
–20.2
–6.1
–8.7
–1.4
14.9
–9.5
–8.6
–6.4
–13.5
–5.9
–8.9
–17.6
–10.2
–8.6
–10.7
–10.0
–16.1
–3.5
–19.8
3.6
–7.2
–22.9
–3.5
–19.4
–22.7
–1.5
...
–7.7
–5.8
–8.0
7.5
–14.3

–0.6
11.7
–7.3
3.1
–4.0
–14.4
–16.3
–2.7
–7.6
–5.8
–6.0
–5.2
14.0
10.4
–5.7
3.2
1.0
–2.5
24.0
–7.5
–9.0
–18.4
–1.3
–9.2
–13.4
–12.8
–7.0
–8.6
–5.1
–13.5
–25.3
–3.0
–25.1
2.6
–7.4
–27.7
–6.5
–23.0
–65.0
–2.2
18.2
–10.8
–7.8
–9.9
4.7
–20.1

–1.7
10.8
–7.4
0.3
–6.7
–18.6
–12.6
–3.3
–6.5
–7.8
–5.5
–4.6
17.7
–1.2
–1.1
2.7
12.5
–6.9
17.9
–4.5
–11.7
–20.0
–8.4
–8.4
–8.4
–11.4
–7.6
–9.2
–2.2
–7.1
–44.7
–5.7
–16.1
3.8
–11.2
–21.9
–8.7
–21.1
–31.8
–5.1
–15.9
–11.6
–7.6
–6.8
5.4
–13.1

–2.2
6.1
–7.4
8.9
–11.3
–19.3
–4.9
–3.6
–3.3
–9.1
–7.0
–5.0
13.8
–1.4
–2.4
3.6
18.7
–5.9
7.3
–6.8
–11.9
–12.5
–4.6
–8.8
–5.1
–17.0
–5.9
–8.4
–2.9
–6.2
–42.9
–4.0
–16.8
3.7
–8.7
–15.2
–8.2
–11.9
–17.5
–5.8
–3.9
–10.6
–13.2
–7.1
–0.6
–16.6

–3.6
–2.6
–8.6
15.4
–8.1
–18.5
–9.1
–4.0
–14.8
–8.9
–6.3
–4.6
1.4
1.4
–4.3
4.0
21.2
–6.4
7.6
–7.2
–9.5
–13.4
0.5
–10.4
–4.8
–19.4
–0.3
–8.3
–4.7
–5.6
–38.2
–10.8
–15.4
0.2
–10.3
–21.9
–7.0
–23.1
–18.2
–5.1
–1.5
–10.1
–10.0
–8.1
2.1
–14.2

–6.0
–8.8
–9.0
7.8
–8.5
–17.7
–3.2
–3.8
–9.7
–13.6
–0.4
–3.7
–54.1
–0.6
–16.2
–1.4
26.1
–10.2
–5.6
–9.8
–7.7
–12.5
1.9
–6.7
–3.9
–20.8
–1.9
–9.4
–5.3
–4.8
–40.3
–12.4
–20.5
–3.2
–14.5
–13.0
–5.4
–18.6
–17.4
–4.6
–7.1
–8.4
–11.0
–7.1
–3.9
–9.5

–3.9
–4.8
–9.4
13.7
–7.2
–13.1
–2.4
–3.2
–5.5
–9.2
–7.4
–3.1
–73.6
–1.1
–12.9
–2.1
17.2
–9.0
–9.9
–5.9
–6.7
–31.1
1.3
–5.2
–8.2
–14.1
0.6
–13.6
–7.2
–4.3
–39.3
–13.8
–15.7
0.7
–15.8
–6.5
–4.0
–20.1
–2.3
–2.8
1.3
–4.5
–9.3
–2.9
–4.5
–3.4

–2.3
–1.0
–11.1
12.3
–8.1
–12.3
–6.2
–2.7
–8.4
–5.7
–4.1
–0.5
–12.9
–4.6
–5.9
–2.4
13.7
–8.1
–4.9
–13.1
–4.5
–6.9
–2.0
–6.3
–3.7
–19.1
–0.3
–9.5
–5.8
–6.6
–22.4
–3.3
–14.1
2.8
–6.8
–8.2
–7.3
–20.5
–11.3
–2.5
–5.0
–2.8
–8.0
–4.6
–3.9
–4.1

–2.8
–2.1
–10.6
8.7
–8.6
–13.4
–9.1
–3.2
–8.9
–4.2
–9.2
0.0
9.1
–4.6
–3.1
–1.6
10.3
–6.2
–1.6
–12.5
–4.1
–21.2
–3.6
–5.6
–6.0
–18.3
–2.2
–9.3
–7.2
–8.2
–18.2
–6.0
–16.2
2.0
–8.9
–7.0
–7.7
–18.4
–13.4
–3.2
–8.8
–4.3
–9.2
–6.9
–4.0
–5.8

–3.4
–1.9
–8.9
7.7
–7.6
–12.6
–10.0
–3.0
–8.4
–5.5
–10.1
–1.8
12.4
–4.2
–3.6
–2.3
9.8
–6.2
–0.5
–13.6
–4.0
–16.4
–4.1
–5.3
–12.5
–21.4
–3.4
–8.1
–7.8
–10.4
–44.7
–7.6
–18.3
1.0
–9.4
–10.2
–7.1
–18.0
–14.1
–3.5
2.7
–5.5
–8.0
–8.9
–3.4
–5.6

2023
–3.4
–0.7
–6.5
10.0
–6.3
–9.5
–8.9
–3.0
–5.3
–4.3
–8.8
–2.9
–5.1
–2.8
–6.0
–2.7
14.0
–4.4
3.7
–11.8
–3.6
–10.9
–3.1
–4.1
–6.9
–20.6
–4.4
–7.6
–7.1
–4.0
–105.8
–5.5
–12.1
0.1
–5.3
–7.4
–6.1
–17.0
–9.3
–3.6
–1.8
–4.5
–5.9
–3.6
–1.8
–5.0

1Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic
structure.
2Starting in 2014 data exclude Crimea and Sevastopol.
3See country-specific note for Libya in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
5Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
6The Zimbabwe dollar ceased circulating in early 2009. Data are based on IMF staff estimates of price and exchange rate developments in US dollars. IMF staff estimates of US dollar
values may differ from authorities’ estimates.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

173

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances
(Billions of US dollars)

Advanced Economies
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
United States
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Euro Area
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Germany
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
France
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Italy
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

174

Projections
2018
2019

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

–123.6
340.7
–969.0
–114.1
265.8
352.9

–260.6
358.9
–1,111.5
–6.4
148.9
349.8

–149.4
111.9
–246.3
–98.3
–189.9
273.2

229.5
154.3
–540.9
73.9
389.2
153.1

363.3
235.9
71.8
–11.5
–67.8
134.9

349.7
69.5
175.9
–107.6
–14.8
226.7

436.4
–146.5
505.1
14.5
–116.6
179.7

512.0
292.9
151.3
–13.9
–167.2
248.9

337.0
–28.6
389.5
1.8
–110.0
84.0

269.6
156.0
125.3
–18.8
–66.4
73.5

–446.4
85.8
–620.8
–14.1
100.9
1.8

–526.0
173.1
–226.3
–35.0
–453.7
15.9

–448.2
126.9
–498.3
7.1
–88.4
4.5

–400.3
104.7
–30.7
2.2
–473.4
–3.1

–297.3
135.7
–114.9
–54.3
–260.1
–3.6

–325.9
–202.0
–53.5
–27.0
–37.1
–6.3

–385.1
–181.5
–195.1
7.8
–18.4
2.1

–331.9
24.4
–212.5
23.1
–165.2
–1.7

–567.1
–341.3
–170.4
23.4
–78.8
0.0

–643.2
–171.2
–398.7
16.8
–90.1
0.0

–16.9
82.3
–81.4
–4.4
–27.1
13.7

–40.9
124.9
–383.3
5.5
197.7
14.3

184.3
59.4
–175.8
38.9
242.9
19.0

443.7
23.8
–156.9
42.1
528.5
6.2

350.9
90.3
40.8
66.2
147.8
5.8

296.5
276.1
79.7
96.6
–167.7
11.8

384.1
187.0
552.5
19.6
–392.4
17.4

467.7
49.7
355.7
28.7
35.1
–1.5

...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...

123.7
60.6
154.1
17.6
–110.7
2.1

167.7
10.3
–51.4
39.8
165.1
3.9

194.3
33.6
66.8
30.9
61.1
1.7

300.0
26.0
209.6
31.8
31.4
1.2

317.8
95.3
177.7
43.3
4.8
–3.3

264.9
74.8
213.5
29.0
–49.9
–2.4

284.3
33.2
228.8
35.8
–15.4
1.9

316.3
47.1
228.1
10.3
32.3
–1.5

326.9
59.5
253.4
28.5
–14.4
0.0

323.6
50.7
247.9
26.1
–1.1
0.0

–1.6
34.3
–155.0
–4.1
115.5
7.7

–78.6
19.8
–335.1
–19.4
263.8
–7.7

–48.0
19.4
–50.6
–18.4
–3.6
5.2

–19.2
–13.9
–79.3
–22.3
98.2
–1.9

–10.3
47.2
–23.8
–31.8
–2.9
1.0

–0.8
7.9
43.2
14.5
–74.2
8.0

–14.4
28.1
23.8
–17.6
–51.1
2.5

–36.0
8.3
22.4
–1.4
–61.9
–3.4

–24.3
13.2
34.4
–8.7
–65.8
2.6

–18.6
17.6
43.1
–16.3
–65.6
2.6

–107.1
21.3
62.5
6.6
–198.9
1.4

–79.9
17.2
25.6
–10.1
–113.9
1.3

–4.1
6.8
–22.4
7.5
2.1
1.9

29.0
0.9
–5.4
4.0
27.5
2.0

68.5
3.1
5.5
–4.8
65.9
–1.3

39.1
2.7
108.2
2.6
–75.0
0.6

72.4
–4.5
176.5
–3.3
–95.1
–1.3

53.3
–12.7
111.1
–6.5
–41.7
3.0

43.4
2.6
72.2
–2.7
–28.7
0.0

35.7
3.0
28.7
–0.6
4.6
0.0

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)

Spain
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Japan
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
United Kingdom
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Canada
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Other Advanced Economies 1
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Emerging Market and Developing
Economies
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Projections
2018
2019

–58.9
–1.9
–46.6
–11.4
0.0
1.1

–43.4
12.8
43.1
2.9
–116.2
13.9

0.5
–27.2
53.7
–10.7
–18.2
2.8

41.6
–24.6
–83.6
1.4
147.8
0.7

14.8
8.6
–12.1
1.7
11.5
5.1

23.1
31.0
10.2
–1.1
–22.6
5.6

27.9
18.5
55.1
–2.9
–51.8
9.1

27.3
22.9
26.3
–2.5
–23.4
4.1

19.8
19.9
6.7
0.0
–6.7
0.0

20.6
20.3
6.2
0.0
–5.9
0.0

247.3
72.5
147.9
–11.9
–5.5
44.3

158.4
117.8
–162.9
–17.1
43.4
177.3

53.9
117.5
28.8
6.7
–61.1
–37.9

–4.3
144.7
–280.6
58.1
34.8
38.7

58.9
118.6
–42.2
34.0
–60.1
8.5

180.9
133.3
131.5
17.7
–106.7
5.1

263.7
134.4
276.5
–16.1
–125.4
–5.7

158.0
149.7
–53.5
30.5
7.7
23.6

180.4
132.5
–47.0
31.7
52.8
10.5

193.0
144.6
–44.0
32.6
48.8
11.0

–108.1
–10.1
–201.0
–69.3
162.9
9.4

–43.3
53.4
–215.5
7.4
103.4
7.9

–92.6
–34.8
275.0
–65.8
–279.1
12.1

–132.5
–11.2
–284.2
63.4
91.8
7.8

–154.2
–176.1
16.4
31.2
–37.5
11.7

–142.6
–106.0
–201.8
–128.6
261.6
32.2

–145.8
–219.5
–195.4
29.3
231.0
8.8

–77.9
81.7
–86.3
12.7
–94.8
8.8

–101.7
64.6
0.0
1.8
–180.5
12.4

–92.6
53.4
0.0
–8.4
–150.7
13.2

–58.3
6.3
–109.9
...
41.4
3.9

–49.4
12.5
–104.3
...
34.3
8.1

–62.7
12.8
–63.8
...
–13.4
1.7

–56.9
–12.0
–27.1
...
–22.5
4.7

–42.2
1.3
–32.9
...
–15.9
5.3

–57.8
22.2
–44.8
...
–43.8
8.5

–51.5
36.3
–119.2
...
25.8
5.6

–40.0
54.4
–81.0
...
–14.2
0.8

–52.2
30.2
–62.7
...
–19.8
0.0

–45.6
28.3
–66.6
...
–7.2
0.0

283.8
93.5
–57.1
–15.2
–16.8
279.3

284.7
–6.5
46.8
31.1
88.5
125.1

256.3
–34.8
148.7
–28.3
–104.0
274.7

375.4
26.3
138.4
–33.5
143.1
101.3

352.3
–7.3
180.7
–23.5
96.0
106.3

303.7
–108.1
333.5
–14.2
–83.4
175.9

337.9
–79.0
275.2
–0.8
–8.6
151.0

342.6
–52.7
163.4
–29.6
43.8
217.7

372.5
–47.0
203.2
–40.4
202.0
54.6

360.6
–24.8
208.0
–37.1
172.2
42.2

150.3
–456.7
–223.7
...
–18.8
848.4

239.6
–530.6
–145.4
...
163.2
747.0

119.4
–486.7
–234.4
...
399.0
442.3

33.9
–480.2
–155.7
...
83.0
590.9

15.9
–416.6
–113.2
...
409.4
128.8

–275.3
–340.5
114.5
...
460.1
–513.7

–420.7
–271.5
–46.3
...
385.6
–476.8

–257.0
–343.6
–174.8
...
95.4
162.7

23.6
–326.1
–31.0
...
370.7
10.7

33.9
–323.9
–19.4
...
321.2
56.0

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

175

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)

Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Emerging and Developing Asia
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Emerging and Developing Europe
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Latin America and the Caribbean
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Middle East, North Africa,
Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Sub-Saharan Africa
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

176

2010

2011

87.4
–8.5
–14.2
...
36.0
72.4

103.0
–15.2
17.9
...
64.3
34.2

146.5
–225.0
–93.3
0.2
–97.3
562.9

2012

Projections
2018
2019

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

62.6
–27.6
3.5
...
44.4
40.9

2.6
–3.6
–0.2
...
27.5
–21.5

12.2
19.2
28.8
...
73.0
–114.1

53.9
0.6
12.0
...
38.8
–4.9

3.7
–34.3
–2.4
...
29.9
10.1

29.1
–1.6
–17.4
...
18.8
28.8

88.2
2.6
–0.6
...
19.9
66.0

76.1
1.9
–2.9
...
9.3
67.5

65.7
–277.3
–58.0
–0.3
–28.6
431.7

7.4
–222.0
–115.5
1.5
207.4
139.2

31.7
–273.2
–64.7
–2.0
–78.7
451.3

150.4
–203.4
–123.9
0.8
281.3
196.2

87.1
–139.8
82.3
–1.3
462.4
–316.1

–31.6
–26.9
31.5
–10.0
356.6
–381.9

–91.2
–145.2
–45.9
2.6
–98.2
196.5

30.5
–137.9
14.2
2.0
234.5
–80.7

41.3
–128.9
–16.8
2.0
238.1
–52.7

–89.2
–26.8
–45.8
0.0
–52.4
35.9

–107.2
–39.9
–53.5
1.6
–30.1
14.6

–66.7
–27.7
–70.2
–3.0
6.4
27.8

–62.7
–26.5
–40.0
–1.4
–13.3
18.5

–44.0
–32.8
–19.3
0.3
8.0
–0.2

–9.9
–35.0
24.6
–1.8
12.8
–10.4

–14.3
–30.7
–4.2
0.1
–2.9
23.5

–45.7
–24.7
–24.0
–3.2
18.0
–11.7

–35.8
–32.2
5.4
–0.7
–1.0
–7.3

–16.8
–27.9
–0.6
–0.9
15.0
–2.3

–115.1
–111.3
–95.9
0.7
0.3
91.0

–126.6
–145.1
–106.9
5.5
11.8
108.1

–146.5
–149.2
–80.9
2.5
21.9
59.1

–188.3
–145.3
–101.2
1.8
44.8
11.7

–205.3
–141.0
–109.6
4.4
1.8
39.1

–192.5
–134.7
–59.0
1.2
28.7
–28.9

–102.5
–130.9
–51.5
–1.1
60.1
20.9

–90.4
–137.3
–39.0
4.7
63.5
17.5

–84.4
–128.3
–8.8
0.6
60.8
–8.7

–91.3
–123.1
–2.9
0.7
35.2
–1.2

127.1
–48.1
26.0
...
63.5
85.9

320.6
–20.5
74.4
...
128.3
137.8

284.1
–25.5
57.0
...
98.4
154.3

304.4
–7.9
72.5
...
112.0
128.1

180.5
–28.9
132.6
...
61.0
16.3

–134.5
0.5
69.8
...
–65.6
–138.9

–207.8
–7.4
–6.4
...
–55.0
–138.5

–21.0
–6.6
–27.1
...
93.7
–80.7

62.5
4.2
–23.7
...
50.9
31.2

75.0
1.6
9.4
...
23.5
40.7

–6.4
–37.0
–0.4
–0.2
31.2
0.3

–15.8
–32.7
–19.3
–1.7
17.5
20.7

–21.6
–34.6
–28.4
–1.7
20.5
21.0

–53.7
–23.6
–22.0
–0.8
–9.3
2.8

–78.0
–29.6
–21.8
–1.5
–15.8
–8.5

–79.4
–32.1
–15.2
–0.4
–17.0
–14.4

–68.3
–41.2
–13.3
0.9
–3.0
–10.8

–37.8
–28.2
–21.5
0.3
–0.2
12.1

–37.5
–34.5
–17.6
–0.2
5.7
10.3

–50.4
–47.5
–5.6
–0.2
0.1
4.0

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)

Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Nonfuel
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2013-17
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Memorandum
World
Financial Account Balance

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Projections
2018
2019

250.8
–32.5
20.4
...
146.0
115.1

511.8
–24.0
88.9
...
250.3
194.7

445.7
–29.3
50.2
...
188.7
234.5

376.1
13.0
79.1
...
183.5
100.2

226.2
5.4
164.6
...
157.7
–106.5

–85.8
6.9
80.9
...
8.5
–189.7

–158.5
–29.3
–9.3
...
34.4
–154.6

67.2
11.7
–38.9
...
147.4
–53.5

226.7
21.6
–14.4
...
116.4
102.5

223.2
15.8
3.0
...
89.5
114.3

–99.0
–422.0
–244.1
0.7
–164.4
732.2

–272.2
–506.6
–234.3
5.8
–87.1
552.3

–326.3
–457.4
–284.7
–0.9
210.4
207.7

–342.2
–493.2
–234.8
–2.4
–100.5
490.7

–210.3
–422.0
–277.7
3.9
251.7
235.3

–189.5
–347.4
33.5
–2.2
451.6
–324.0

–262.2
–242.2
–37.0
–10.0
351.2
–322.1

–324.2
–355.4
–135.9
4.3
–52.0
216.2

–203.1
–347.7
–16.6
1.8
254.3
–91.8

–189.3
–339.7
–22.3
1.5
231.6
–58.3

–269.1
–212.8
–221.5
...
–54.3
219.3

–365.7
–281.7
–182.6
...
–78.7
175.2

–398.1
–275.7
–215.9
...
–31.1
127.4

–402.7
–265.1
–179.6
...
–27.3
73.2

–390.8
–288.1
–198.4
...
–13.8
104.6

–309.8
–289.7
–50.2
...
36.3
–4.3

–272.7
–306.7
–49.4
...
18.9
77.5

–289.0
–293.4
–108.0
...
28.2
81.2

–320.4
–305.3
–17.5
...
31.8
–28.7

–306.2
–320.0
–31.1
...
15.1
29.5

0.9
–20.3
–11.1
...
7.3
25.3

–28.3
–20.8
0.8
...
2.1
–9.8

–46.3
–27.4
–1.7
...
–5.7
–13.3

–48.2
–24.1
–10.5
...
–16.8
4.1

–31.9
–19.9
–4.1
...
0.0
–7.0

–41.9
–25.5
1.9
...
–24.9
7.3

–54.3
–26.2
–1.0
...
–23.7
–2.1

–38.8
–24.9
–23.0
...
8.8
0.8

–33.0
–25.8
–21.0
...
8.0
7.2

–34.1
–32.1
–2.7
...
–1.6
3.6

26.6

–21.0

–30.0

263.4

379.1

74.4

15.7

255.1

360.6

303.5

Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar
values for the relevant individual countries. Some group aggregates for the financial derivatives are not shown because of incomplete data. Projections for the euro area are not available because
of data constraints.
1Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic
structure.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

177

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing
(Percent of GDP)
Averages
2000–09 2004–11
Advanced Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
United States
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Euro Area
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Germany
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
France
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Italy
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Spain
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Japan
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
United Kingdom
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

178

Projections
2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

Average
2020–23

–0.8
–0.9
22.0
22.7
0.0

–0.7
–0.7
21.5
22.2
0.0

0.1
0.1
21.7
21.2
0.0

0.5
0.5
21.9
21.1
0.0

0.5
0.5
22.5
21.4
0.0

0.6
0.7
22.7
21.5
0.0

0.7
0.7
22.2
21.3
0.0

0.9
0.9
22.8
21.6
0.0

0.8
0.7
22.8
22.0
0.0

0.5
0.5
22.9
22.4
0.0

0.4
0.4
23.0
22.7
0.0

–4.5
–4.5
17.8
22.0
0.0

–4.3
–4.3
16.7
21.1
0.0

–2.6
–2.6
18.7
20.0
0.0

–2.1
–2.1
19.2
20.4
0.0

–2.1
–2.1
20.3
20.8
0.0

–2.2
–2.2
20.1
21.0
0.0

–2.3
–2.3
18.6
20.3
0.0

–2.2
–2.3
18.9
20.6
0.1

–2.5
–2.5
18.8
21.1
0.0

–3.0
–3.0
18.7
21.8
0.0

–3.2
–3.3
18.8
22.1
0.1

–0.1
–0.2
22.8
22.5
0.1

0.0
–0.1
22.7
22.2
0.1

1.5
1.4
22.3
20.0
0.1

2.4
2.2
22.4
19.6
0.2

2.6
2.5
22.9
19.9
0.1

3.1
3.2
23.7
20.3
–0.1

3.6
3.6
24.1
20.7
0.0

3.3
3.5
24.7
20.8
–0.2

...
3.0
24.9
21.3
...

...
2.9
25.1
21.6
...

...
2.8
25.4
22.0
...

3.4
3.4
23.7
20.3
0.0

5.5
5.6
25.3
19.8
0.0

7.0
7.0
26.3
19.3
0.0

6.7
6.7
26.2
19.5
0.0

7.6
7.5
27.1
19.6
0.1

8.9
8.9
28.1
19.2
0.0

8.6
8.5
28.2
19.7
0.1

7.9
7.9
28.0
20.1
0.0

8.1
8.1
28.5
20.4
0.0

7.9
7.9
28.7
20.8
0.0

7.5
7.5
28.9
21.4
0.0

1.0
1.0
23.4
22.4
0.0

0.0
–0.1
22.7
22.8
0.0

–1.1
–1.0
21.7
22.6
–0.2

–0.5
–0.5
21.8
22.3
0.0

–1.0
–1.0
21.8
22.7
–0.1

–0.4
–0.4
22.3
22.7
0.0

–0.7
–0.8
21.9
22.7
0.1

–0.5
–0.6
22.9
23.5
0.0

–0.9
–0.9
22.7
23.7
0.0

–0.7
–0.7
22.9
23.6
0.0

–0.3
–0.3
23.4
23.7
0.0

–0.8
–0.9
20.2
21.1
0.1

–1.8
–1.9
19.2
21.1
0.1

–0.1
–0.3
17.5
17.9
0.2

1.0
1.0
18.0
17.0
0.0

2.1
1.9
19.0
17.0
0.2

1.7
1.5
18.8
17.3
0.2

2.4
2.6
19.7
17.1
–0.2

2.7
2.8
20.3
17.5
–0.1

2.1
2.0
20.1
18.1
0.1

1.7
1.6
19.9
18.4
0.1

1.2
1.1
19.4
18.3
0.1

–5.5
–6.2
22.2
28.3
0.7

–6.0
–6.5
21.1
27.6
0.5

0.3
–0.2
19.8
20.0
0.5

2.2
1.5
20.2
18.7
0.6

1.6
1.1
20.5
19.5
0.5

1.8
1.1
21.5
20.4
0.7

2.2
1.9
22.4
20.5
0.2

2.1
1.9
23.0
21.1
0.2

1.4
1.2
22.9
21.8
0.2

1.4
1.2
23.1
22.0
0.2

1.6
1.4
23.4
22.0
0.2

3.1
3.2
27.9
24.7
–0.1

3.4
3.4
26.9
23.5
–0.1

0.9
1.0
23.6
22.7
0.0

0.7
0.9
24.1
23.2
–0.1

0.7
0.8
24.7
23.9
0.0

3.1
3.1
27.1
24.0
–0.1

3.8
3.9
27.5
23.6
–0.1

4.0
4.0
28.0
24.0
–0.1

3.6
3.6
28.1
24.5
–0.1

3.7
3.8
28.4
24.6
–0.1

4.1
4.1
28.7
24.5
–0.1

–2.8
–2.8
14.7
17.5
0.0

–3.0
–3.0
13.7
16.7
0.0

–3.8
–3.8
12.1
15.9
0.0

–5.2
–5.1
11.1
16.2
–0.1

–5.0
–4.9
12.3
17.3
–0.1

–5.0
–4.9
12.3
17.2
–0.1

–5.3
–5.2
12.0
17.3
–0.1

–3.9
–3.8
13.6
17.4
–0.1

–3.6
–3.5
13.7
17.2
–0.1

–3.3
–3.2
14.0
17.2
–0.1

–3.0
–2.9
14.7
17.7
–0.1

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Averages
2000–09 2004–11
Canada
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Other Advanced Economies1
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Emerging Market and Developing
Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Emerging and Developing Asia
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Emerging and Developing Europe
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Latin America and the Caribbean
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Sub-Saharan Africa
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

Projections
2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

Average
2020–23

1.1
1.1
23.0
21.9
0.0

–0.4
–0.4
22.8
23.2
0.0

–3.6
–3.6
21.3
24.9
0.0

–3.2
–3.2
21.7
24.9
0.0

–2.4
–2.4
22.5
24.9
0.0

–3.6
–3.6
20.5
24.1
0.0

–3.2
–3.2
20.0
23.2
0.0

–3.0
–2.9
20.8
23.7
0.0

–3.0
–3.0
20.8
23.8
0.0

–2.5
–2.5
21.5
24.0
0.0

–2.1
–2.1
22.2
24.3
0.0

3.8
3.8
29.7
25.6
–0.1

4.1
4.1
30.3
25.9
0.0

4.1
4.1
30.2
26.0
0.0

5.2
5.1
30.3
25.1
0.1

5.1
5.2
30.5
25.2
–0.1

5.4
5.8
30.8
24.8
–0.4

5.5
5.4
30.1
24.7
0.1

5.0
5.1
30.5
25.3
–0.2

5.0
5.0
30.6
25.5
0.0

4.8
4.8
30.5
25.6
–0.1

4.4
4.5
30.0
25.4
–0.1

2.6
2.5
29.5
27.3
0.1

2.8
2.8
32.2
29.6
0.2

1.3
1.3
33.5
32.4
0.1

0.7
0.6
32.8
32.4
0.1

0.6
0.6
33.0
32.6
0.0

0.0
–0.2
32.7
32.9
0.1

–0.2
–0.2
32.0
32.2
0.1

0.0
0.0
32.2
32.2
0.1

0.1
0.0
32.7
32.8
0.1

0.1
0.0
32.6
32.8
0.1

–0.4
–0.5
32.1
32.7
0.1

6.0
6.5
27.4
21.1
–0.5

4.8
5.1
27.1
22.0
–0.3

2.2
2.4
27.1
24.7
–0.2

0.6
0.6
24.3
23.6
0.0

0.6
2.1
25.1
22.9
–1.5

2.8
2.8
26.0
22.8
0.0

0.0
0.0
24.8
24.3
0.0

1.2
1.1
25.8
24.5
0.0

4.1
4.1
26.3
22.0
0.0

3.3
3.3
26.7
23.2
0.0

2.3
2.3
26.6
24.2
0.0

3.7
3.6
38.4
35.2
0.1

3.9
3.8
42.4
38.8
0.1

1.0
0.9
43.7
42.6
0.1

0.8
0.7
43.0
42.3
0.1

1.6
1.5
43.6
42.0
0.0

2.0
2.0
42.4
40.4
0.0

1.4
1.4
41.1
39.7
0.0

0.9
0.9
40.7
39.9
0.0

0.2
0.1
40.3
40.1
0.0

0.2
0.2
39.9
39.8
0.0

–0.1
–0.1
38.9
39.0
0.0

–4.5
–4.8
19.7
24.2
0.3

–5.3
–5.8
19.9
25.7
0.5

–3.4
–4.4
20.5
24.9
0.9

–2.5
–3.6
21.5
25.0
1.1

–1.7
–2.9
22.1
24.9
1.3

–0.6
–1.9
22.9
24.7
1.3

–1.1
–1.8
22.4
24.1
0.6

–1.9
–2.6
23.0
25.5
0.6

–2.0
–2.8
22.7
25.4
0.8

–0.5
–1.4
22.2
23.7
0.9

–1.1
–1.8
21.3
23.0
0.7

–0.1
–0.2
20.3
20.4
0.1

–0.1
–0.2
21.3
21.3
0.1

–2.3
–2.3
20.0
22.4
0.0

–2.7
–2.7
19.3
22.3
0.1

–3.1
–3.1
17.9
21.6
0.0

–3.3
–3.3
18.2
21.8
0.0

–1.9
–1.9
17.5
19.3
0.0

–1.5
–1.5
17.9
19.0
0.0

–1.6
–1.6
18.0
20.0
0.0

–1.7
–1.8
17.9
20.7
0.0

–1.9
–1.9
18.4
21.5
0.0

7.8
8.3
34.6
27.0
0.1

9.5
10.1
37.3
28.0
0.1

12.0
12.5
38.0
25.9
0.0

10.0
9.8
36.2
25.9
0.0

6.3
5.5
32.9
26.7
0.2

–3.6
–4.0
25.0
28.3
0.0

–3.7
–3.9
24.7
27.6
0.0

–0.7
–0.7
26.5
26.8
0.1

2.0
1.8
29.7
27.2
0.1

2.0
1.9
29.4
26.6
0.1

0.1
0.0
27.0
25.9
0.1

1.9
0.7
20.2
19.7
1.2

2.3
0.9
21.5
20.6
1.5

–0.6
–1.7
19.5
21.0
1.1

–1.7
–2.2
18.7
20.9
0.4

–3.3
–3.6
18.8
22.0
0.4

–5.6
–6.0
16.7
22.0
0.4

–3.4
–3.9
17.4
20.8
0.4

–1.9
–2.3
19.0
21.1
0.4

–2.4
–2.8
17.8
20.5
0.4

–3.0
–3.4
17.6
20.9
0.4

–3.1
–3.4
17.9
21.2
0.3

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

179

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Averages
2000–09 2004–11
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Nonfuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2013–17
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Memorandum
World
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

Projections
2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

Average
2020–23

9.1
9.6
33.9
24.7
–0.1

10.0
10.4
35.0
25.0
0.0

9.3
9.6
34.6
25.4
–0.1

7.4
7.3
32.0
24.9
0.0

4.7
5.0
30.2
25.3
–0.6

–1.5
–1.6
26.6
28.2
–0.1

–1.6
–1.7
25.4
26.5
0.0

1.4
1.5
27.4
25.6
0.0

4.4
4.3
29.7
24.8
0.1

4.1
4.1
29.5
24.7
0.1

2.3
2.2
27.5
24.5
0.0

0.8
0.6
28.4
28.0
0.2

0.8
0.6
31.4
30.9
0.2

–0.9
–1.1
33.2
34.2
0.2

–1.0
–1.2
33.1
34.2
0.2

–0.4
–0.6
33.7
34.2
0.2

0.3
0.1
33.9
33.7
0.2

0.1
0.0
33.2
33.1
0.1

–0.2
–0.3
33.1
33.4
0.1

–0.7
–0.8
33.3
34.2
0.1

–0.6
–0.8
33.2
34.2
0.1

–0.8
–0.9
32.8
34.0
0.1

–0.7
–1.1
22.3
23.6
0.3

–1.1
–1.4
23.6
25.2
0.4

–2.7
–3.1
23.1
26.1
0.3

–2.4
–2.7
22.5
25.2
0.3

–2.3
–2.6
22.5
25.1
0.3

–2.3
–2.7
22.0
24.6
0.3

–1.8
–2.0
22.2
24.1
0.2

–1.8
–2.0
22.5
24.5
0.2

–2.3
–2.5
22.4
24.8
0.2

–2.1
–2.3
22.7
24.9
0.2

–2.1
–2.3
23.2
25.5
0.2

–0.4
–0.9
20.2
21.7
0.5

–1.7
–2.3
20.1
22.3
0.6

–6.1
–6.7
14.5
20.7
0.6

–6.0
–6.2
13.1
19.2
0.3

–4.1
–4.5
14.1
18.6
0.4

–5.4
–5.7
12.5
17.7
0.3

–6.1
–6.2
12.6
18.3
0.1

–5.4
–5.7
13.9
18.9
0.3

–4.6
–4.9
14.8
19.3
0.2

–4.6
–4.9
15.3
19.9
0.3

–4.7
–4.9
16.8
21.3
0.2

0.0
0.0
23.9
23.9
0.1

0.3
0.3
24.7
24.4
0.1

0.5
0.5
26.2
25.4
0.1

0.6
0.5
26.2
25.5
0.1

0.6
0.5
26.7
25.8
0.0

0.4
0.3
26.7
26.0
0.0

0.4
0.3
26.0
25.5
0.0

0.5
0.5
26.5
25.8
0.0

0.5
0.4
26.7
26.2
0.1

0.3
0.3
26.8
26.5
0.1

0.1
0.0
26.8
26.8
0.1

Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the
US dollar values for the relevant individual countries. This differs from the calculations in the April 2005 and earlier issues of the World Economic Outlook, in which the composites
were weighted by GDP valued at purchasing power parities as a share of total world GDP. The estimates of gross national savings and investment (or gross capital formation) are
from individual countries’ national accounts statistics. The estimates of the current account balance, the capital account balance, and the financial account balance (or net lending/net
borrowing) are from the balance of payments statistics. The link between domestic transactions and transactions with the rest of the world can be expressed as accounting identities.
Savings (S ) minus investment (I ) is equal to the current account balance (CAB ) (S − I = CAB ). Also, net lending/net borrowing (NLB ) is the sum of the current account balance and the
capital account balance (KAB ) (NLB = CAB + KAB ). In practice, these identities do not hold exactly; imbalances result from imperfections in source data and compilation as well as from
asymmetries in group composition due to data availability.
1Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic
structure.

180

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
Projections
Averages
2000–09
2010–19
World Real GDP
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Memorandum
Potential Output
Major Advanced Economies
World Trade, Volume1
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
World Prices in US Dollars
Manufactures
Oil
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Interest Rates
Real Six-Month LIBOR2
World Real Long-Term Interest Rate3
Current Account Balances
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Total External Debt
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Debt Service
Emerging Market and Developing Economies

2016

2017

2018

2019

Annual Percent Change
3.7
3.7
2.3
2.4
4.7
4.7

3.9
1.8
6.1

3.8
2.0
5.2

3.3
1.7
4.4

1.9
5.0

1.3
4.8

1.5
2.2

1.5
5.2

3.6
9.1

4.4
5.8

2.4
1.8

3.9
8.0

4.4
5.5

–0.2
1.4

Averages
2016–19 2020–23

3.7
2.1
4.7

3.6
2.1
4.6

3.6
1.6
4.9

1.6
4.2

1.6
4.0

1.6
3.9

1.5
3.8

4.2
7.0

3.7
6.0

4.0
4.8

3.6
4.9

3.2
5.3

1.8
3.0

4.4
6.9

3.4
4.7

3.1
4.8

3.1
4.8

3.2
4.6

0.1
0.1

1.0
–1.4

–0.2
0.6

–0.1
1.6

0.1
–0.2

0.2
0.1

0.0
–0.1

1.7
13.1
5.3

0.3
1.1
1.2

–5.2
–15.7
–1.5

1.7
23.3
6.8

2.5
31.4
2.7

1.6
–0.9
–0.7

0.1
7.9
1.7

0.1
–3.2
0.2

2.0
6.8

1.6
5.2

0.8
4.2

1.7
4.3

2.0
5.0

1.9
5.2

1.6
4.7

2.0
4.3

1.2
2.1

–0.6
0.5

0.0
0.4

Percent
–0.4
0.2
–0.2
–0.1

1.1
0.5

0.2
0.2

1.5
0.9

–0.9
2.5

0.4
0.5

0.7
–0.2

Percent of GDP
0.9
0.7
0.0
0.0

0.5
0.0

0.7
–0.1

0.4
–0.5

31.1

28.3

29.7

30.1

29.9

29.8

29.9

27.9

9.3

10.0

10.7

9.8

10.4

10.4

10.3

9.8

1Data

refer to trade in goods and services.
2London interbank offered rate on US dollar deposits minus percent change in US GDP deflator.
3GDP-weighted average of 10-year (or nearest-maturity) government bond rates for Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the
United States.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

181

This page intentionally left blank

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

CHAPTER

1

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
SELECTED TOPICS

World Economic Outlook Archives
World Economic Outlook: Financial Systems and Economic Cycles

September 2006

World Economic Outlook: Spillovers and Cycles in the Global Economy

April 2007

World Economic Outlook: Globalization and Inequality

October 2007

World Economic Outlook: Housing and the Business Cycle

April 2008

World Economic Outlook: Financial Stress, Downturns, and Recoveries

October 2008

World Economic Outlook: Crisis and Recovery

April 2009

World Economic Outlook: Sustaining the Recovery

October 2009

World Economic Outlook: Rebalancing Growth

April 2010

World Economic Outlook: Recovery, Risk, and Rebalancing

October 2010

World Economic Outlook: Tensions from the Two-Speed Recovery—Unemployment, Commodities,
and Capital Flows

April 2011

World Economic Outlook: Slowing Growth, Rising Risks

September 2011

World Economic Outlook: Growth Resuming, Dangers Remain

April 2012

World Economic Outlook: Coping with High Debt and Sluggish Growth

October 2012

World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks

April 2013

World Economic Outlook: Transitions and Tensions

October 2013

World Economic Outlook: Recovery Strengthens, Remains Uneven

April 2014

World Economic Outlook: Legacies, Clouds, Uncertainties

October 2014

World Economic Outlook: Uneven Growth—Short- and Long-Term Factors

April 2015

World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices

October 2015

World Economic Outlook: Too Slow for Too Long

April 2016

World Economic Outlook: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

October 2016

World Economic Outlook: Gaining Momentum?

April 2017

World Economic Outlook: Seeking Sustainable Growth: Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

October 2017

World Economic Outlook: Cyclical Upswing, Structural Change

April 2018

World Economic Outlook: Challenges to Steady Growth

October 2018

I. Methodology—Aggregation, Modeling, and Forecasting
Measuring Inequality: Conceptual, Methodological, and Measurement Issues

October 2007, Box 4.1

New Business Cycle Indices for Latin America: A Historical Reconstruction

October 2007, Box 5.3

Implications of New PPP Estimates for Measuring Global Growth

April 2008, Appendix 1.1

Measuring Output Gaps

October 2008, Box 1.3

Assessing and Communicating Risks to the Global Outlook

October 2008, Appendix 1.1

Fan Chart for Global Growth

April 2009, Appendix 1.2

Indicators for Tracking Growth

October 2010, Appendix 1.2

Inferring Potential Output from Noisy Data: The Global Projection Model View

October 2010, Box 1.3

Uncoordinated Rebalancing

October 2010, Box 1.4

World Economic Outlook Downside Scenarios

April 2011, Box 1.2

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

183

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Fiscal Balance Sheets: The Significance of Nonfinancial Assets and Their Measurement

October 2014, Box 3.3

Tariff Scenarios

October 2016, Scenario Box

World Growth Projections over the Medium Term

October 2016, Box 1.1

II. Historical Surveys
Historical Perspective on Growth and the Current Account

October 2008, Box 6.3

A Historical Perspective on International Financial Crises

October 2009, Box 4.1

The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: 100 Years of Dealing with Public Debt Overhangs

October 2012, Chapter 3

What Is the Effect of Recessions?

October 2015, Box 1.1

III. Economic Growth—Sources and Patterns
Asia Rising: Patterns of Economic Development and Growth

September 2006, Chapter 3

Japan’s Potential Output and Productivity Growth

September 2006, Box 3.1

The Evolution and Impact of Corporate Governance Quality in Asia

September 2006, Box 3.2

Decoupling the Train? Spillovers and Cycles in the Global Economy

April 2007, Chapter 4

Spillovers and International Business Cycle Synchronization: A Broader Perspective

April 2007, Box 4.3

The Discounting Debate

October 2007, Box 1.7

Taxes versus Quantities under Uncertainty (Weitzman, 1974)

October 2007, Box 1.8

Experience with Emissions Trading in the European Union

October 2007, Box 1.9

Climate Change: Economic Impact and Policy Responses

October 2007, Appendix 1.2

What Risks Do Housing Markets Pose for Global Growth?

October 2007, Box 2.1

The Changing Dynamics of the Global Business Cycle

October 2007, Chapter 5

Major Economies and Fluctuations in Global Growth

October 2007, Box 5.1

Improved Macroeconomic Performance—Good Luck or Good Policies?

October 2007, Box 5.2

House Prices: Corrections and Consequences

October 2008, Box 1.2

Global Business Cycles

April 2009, Box 1.1

How Similar Is the Current Crisis to the Great Depression?

April 2009, Box 3.1

Is Credit a Vital Ingredient for Recovery? Evidence from Industry-Level Data

April 2009, Box 3.2

From Recession to Recovery: How Soon and How Strong?

April 2009, Chapter 3

What’s the Damage? Medium-Term Output Dynamics after Financial Crises

October 2009, Chapter 4

Will the Recovery Be Jobless?

October 2009, Box 1.3

Unemployment Dynamics during Recessions and Recoveries: Okun’s Law and Beyond

April 2010, Chapter 3

Does Slow Growth in Advanced Economies Necessarily Imply Slow Growth in Emerging Economies?

October 2010, Box 1.1

The Global Recovery: Where Do We Stand?

April 2012, Box 1.2

How Does Uncertainty Affect Economic Performance?

October 2012, Box 1.3

Resilience in Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Will It Last?

October 2012, Chapter 4

Jobs and Growth: Can’t Have One without the Other?

October 2012, Box 4.1

Spillovers from Policy Uncertainty in the United States and Europe	April 2013, Chapter 2,
Spillover Feature
Breaking through the Frontier: Can Today’s Dynamic Low-Income Countries Make It?

April 2013, Chapter 4

What Explains the Slowdown in the BRICS?

October 2013, Box 1.2

Dancing Together? Spillovers, Common Shocks, and the Role of Financial and Trade Linkages

October 2013, Chapter 3

Output Synchronicity in the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan and in the
Caucasus and Central Asia

October 2013, Box 3.1

Spillovers from Changes in U.S. Monetary Policy

October 2013, Box 3.2

184

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

SELECTED TOPICS

Saving and Economic Growth

April 2014, Box 3.1

On the Receiving End? External Conditions and Emerging Market Growth before, during,
and after the Global Financial Crisis

April 2014, Chapter 4

The Impact of External Conditions on Medium-Term Growth in Emerging Market Economies

April 2014, Box 4.1

The Origins of IMF Growth Forecast Revisions since 2011

October 2014, Box 1.2

Underlying Drivers of U.S. Yields Matter for Spillovers	October 2014, Chapter 2,
Spillover Feature
Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment

October 2014, Chapter 3

The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies

October 2014, Box 3.4

Where Are We Headed? Perspectives on Potential Output

April 2015, Chapter 3

Steady As She Goes—Estimating Sustainable Output

April 2015, Box 3.1

Macroeconomic Developments and Outlook in Low-Income Developing Countries—
The Role of External Factors

April 2016, Box 1.2

Time for a Supply-Side Boost? Macroeconomic Effects of Labor and Product Market
Reforms in Advanced Economies

April 2016, Chapter 3

Road Less Traveled: Growth in Emerging Market and Developing Economies in a Complicated
External Environment

April 2017, Chapter 3

Growing with Flows: Evidence from Industry-Level Data

April 2017, Box 2.2

Emerging Market and Developing Economy Growth: Heterogeneity and Income Convergence
Over the Forecast Horizon

October 2017, Box 1.3

Manufacturing Jobs: Implications for Productivity and Inequality

April 2018, Chapter 3

Is Productivity Growth Shared in a Globalized Economy?

April 2018, Chapter 4

Recent Dynamics of Potential Growth

April 2018, Box 1.3

Growth Outlook: Advanced Economies

October 2018, Box 1.2

Growth Outlook: Emerging Market and Developing Economies

October 2018, Box 1.3

The Global Recovery 10 Years after the 2008

October 2018, Chapter 2

IV. Inflation and Deflation and Commodity Markets
The Boom in Nonfuel Commodity Prices: Can It Last?

September 2006, Chapter 5

International Oil Companies and National Oil Companies in a Changing Oil Sector Environment

September 2006, Box 1.4

Commodity Price Shocks, Growth, and Financing in Sub-Saharan Africa

September 2006, Box 2.2

Has Speculation Contributed to Higher Commodity Prices?

September 2006, Box 5.1

Agricultural Trade Liberalization and Commodity Prices

September 2006, Box 5.2

Recent Developments in Commodity Markets	September 2006,
Appendix 2.1
Who Is Harmed by the Surge in Food Prices?

October 2007, Box 1.1

Refinery Bottlenecks

October 2007, Box 1.5

Making the Most of Biofuels

October 2007, Box 1.6

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects

April 2008, Appendix 1.2

Dollar Depreciation and Commodity Prices

April 2008, Box 1.4

Why Hasn’t Oil Supply Responded to Higher Prices?

April 2008, Box 1.5

Oil Price Benchmarks

April 2008, Box 1.6

Globalization, Commodity Prices, and Developing Countries

April 2008, Chapter 5

The Current Commodity Price Boom in Perspective

April 2008, Box 5.2

Is Inflation Back? Commodity Prices and Inflation

October 2008, Chapter 3

Does Financial Investment Affect Commodity Price Behavior?

October 2008, Box 3.1

Fiscal Responses to Recent Commodity Price Increases: An Assessment

October 2008, Box 3.2

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

185

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Monetary Policy Regimes and Commodity Prices

October 2008, Box 3.3

Assessing Deflation Risks in the G3 Economies

April 2009, Box 1.3

Will Commodity Prices Rise Again When the Global Economy Recovers?

April 2009, Box 1.5

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects

April 2009, Appendix 1.1

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects

October 2009, Appendix 1.1

What Do Options Markets Tell Us about Commodity Price Prospects?

October 2009, Box 1.6

What Explains the Rise in Food Price Volatility?

October 2009, Box 1.7

How Unusual Is the Current Commodity Price Recovery?

April 2010, Box 1.2

Commodity Futures Price Curves and Cyclical Market Adjustment

April 2010, Box 1.3

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects

October 2010, Appendix 1.1

Dismal Prospects for the Real Estate Sector

October 2010, Box 1.2

Have Metals Become More Scarce and What Does Scarcity Mean for Prices?

October 2010, Box 1.5

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects

April 2011, Appendix 1.2

Oil Scarcity, Growth, and Global Imbalances

April 2011, Chapter 3

Life Cycle Constraints on Global Oil Production

April 2011, Box 3.1

Unconventional Natural Gas: A Game Changer?

April 2011, Box 3.2

Short-Term Effects of Oil Shocks on Economic Activity

April 2011, Box 3.3

Low-Frequency Filtering for Extracting Business Cycle Trends

April 2011, Appendix 3.1

The Energy and Oil Empirical Models

April 2011, Appendix 3.2

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects	September 2011,
Appendix 1.1
Financial Investment, Speculation, and Commodity Prices

September 2011, Box 1.4

Target What You Can Hit: Commodity Price Swings and Monetary Policy

September 2011, Chapter 3

Commodity Market Review	April 2012, Chapter 1,
Special Feature
Commodity Price Swings and Commodity Exporters

April 2012, Chapter 4

Macroeconomic Effects of Commodity Price Shocks on Low-Income Countries

April 2012, Box 4.1

Volatile Commodity Prices and the Development Challenge in Low-Income Countries

April 2012, Box 4.2

Commodity Market Review

October 2012, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

Unconventional Energy in the United States

October 2012, Box 1.4

Food Supply Crunch: Who Is Most Vulnerable?

October 2012, Box 1.5

Commodity Market Review

April 2013, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

The Dog That Didn’t Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was It Just Sleeping?

April 2013, Chapter 3

Does Inflation Targeting Still Make Sense with a Flatter Phillips Curve?

April 2013, Box 3.1

Commodity Market Review

October 2013, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

Energy Booms and the Current Account: Cross-Country Experience

October 2013, Box 1.SF.1

Oil Price Drivers and the Narrowing WTI-Brent Spread

October 2013, Box 1.SF.2

Anchoring Inflation Expectations When Inflation Is Undershooting

April 2014, Box 1.3

Commodity Prices and Forecasts	April 2014, Chapter 1,
Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Natural Gas
in the World Economy

October 2014, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Investment
in an Era of Low Oil Prices

April 2015, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

The Oil Price Collapse: Demand or Supply?

April 2015, Box 1.1

186

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

SELECTED TOPICS

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Metals in the World Economy

October 2015, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

The New Frontiers of Metal Extraction: The North-to-South Shift

October 2015, Chapter 1,
Special Feature Box 1.SF.1

Where Are Commodity Exporters Headed? Output Growth in the Aftermath
of the Commodity Boom

October 2015, Chapter 2

The Not-So-Sick Patient: Commodity Booms and the Dutch Disease Phenomenon

October 2015, Box 2.1

Do Commodity Exporters’ Economies Overheat during Commodity Booms?

October 2015, Box 2.4

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the
Energy Transition in an Era of Low Fossil Fuel Prices

April 2016, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

October 2016, Chapter 3

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Food Security and
Markets in the World Economy

October 2016, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

How Much Do Global Prices Matter for Food Inflation?

October 2016, Box 3.3

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the Role of Technology and
April 2017, Chapter 1,
Unconventional Sources in the Global Oil Market		 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
October 2017, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature
April 2018, Chapter 1,
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
		 Special Feature
What Has Held Core Inflation Back in Advanced Economies?

April 2018, Box 1.2

The Role of Metals in the Economics of Electric Vehicles

April 2018, Box 1.SF.1

Inflation Outlook: Regions and Countries

October 2018, Box 1.4

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Recent Trends in Energy Demand
October 2018, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature
The Demand and Supply of Renewable Energy

October 2018, Box 1.SF.1

Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize

October 2018, Chapter 3

Inflation Dynamics in a Wider Group of Emerging Market and Developing Economies

October 2018, Box 3.1

V. Fiscal Policy
Improved Emerging Market Fiscal Performance: Cyclical or Structural?

September 2006, Box 2.1

When Does Fiscal Stimulus Work?

April 2008, Box 2.1

Fiscal Policy as a Countercyclical Tool

October 2008, Chapter 5

Differences in the Extent of Automatic Stabilizers and Their Relationship with Discretionary Fiscal Policy

October 2008, Box 5.1

Why Is It So Hard to Determine the Effects of Fiscal Stimulus?

October 2008, Box 5.2

Have the U.S. Tax Cuts Been “TTT” [Timely, Temporary, and Targeted]?

October 2008, Box 5.3

Will It Hurt? Macroeconomic Effects of Fiscal Consolidation

October 2010, Chapter 3

Separated at Birth? The Twin Budget and Trade Balances

September 2011, Chapter 4

Are We Underestimating Short-Term Fiscal Multipliers?

October 2012, Box 1.1

The Implications of High Public Debt in Advanced Economies

October 2012, Box 1.2

The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: 100 Years of Dealing with Public Debt Overhangs

October 2012, Chapter 3

The Great Divergence of Policies

April 2013, Box 1.1

Public Debt Overhang and Private Sector Performance

April 2013, Box 1.2

Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment

October 2014, Chapter 3

Improving the Efficiency of Public Investment

October 2014, Box 3.2

The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies

October 2014, Box 3.4

Fiscal Institutions, Rules, and Public Investment

October 2014, Box 3.5

Commodity Booms and Public Investment

October 2015, Box 2.2

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

187

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant

October 2017, Chapter 4

The Spillover Impact of U.S. Government Spending Shocks on External Positions

October 2017, Box 4.1

Macroeconomic Impact of Corporate Tax Policy Changes

April 2018, Box 1.5

VI. Monetary Policy, Financial Markets, and Flow of Funds
How Do Financial Systems Affect Economic Cycles?

September 2006, Chapter 4

Financial Leverage and Debt Deflation

September 2006, Box 4.1

Financial Linkages and Spillovers

April 2007, Box 4.1

Macroeconomic Conditions in Industrial Countries and Financial Flows to Emerging Markets

April 2007, Box 4.2

Macroeconomic Implications of Recent Market Turmoil: Patterns from Previous Episodes

October 2007, Box 1.2

What Is Global Liquidity?

October 2007, Box 1.4

The Changing Housing Cycle and the Implications for Monetary Policy

April 2008, Chapter 3

Is There a Credit Crunch?

April 2008, Box 1.1

Assessing Vulnerabilities to Housing Market Corrections

April 2008, Box 3.1

Financial Stress and Economic Downturns

October 2008, Chapter 4

The Latest Bout of Financial Distress: How Does It Change the Global Outlook?

October 2008, Box 1.1

Policies to Resolve Financial System Stress and Restore Sound Financial Intermediation

October 2008, Box 4.1

How Vulnerable Are Nonfinancial Firms?

April 2009, Box 1.2

The Case of Vanishing Household Wealth

April 2009, Box 2.1

Impact of Foreign Bank Ownership during Home-Grown Crises

April 2009, Box 4.1

A Financial Stress Index for Emerging Economies

April 2009, Appendix 4.1

Financial Stress in Emerging Economies: Econometric Analysis

April 2009, Appendix 4.2

How Linkages Fuel the Fire

April 2009, Chapter 4

Lessons for Monetary Policy from Asset Price Fluctuations

October 2009, Chapter 3

Were Financial Markets in Emerging Economies More Resilient than in Past Crises?

October 2009, Box 1.2

Risks from Real Estate Markets

October 2009, Box 1.4

Financial Conditions Indices

April 2011, Appendix 1.1

House Price Busts in Advanced Economies: Repercussions for Global Financial Markets

April 2011, Box 1.1

International Spillovers and Macroeconomic Policymaking

April 2011, Box 1.3

Credit Boom-Bust Cycles: Their Triggers and Policy Implications

September 2011, Box 1.2

Are Equity Price Drops Harbingers of Recession?

September 2011, Box 1.3

Cross-Border Spillovers from Euro Area Bank Deleveraging

April 2012, Chapter 2,
Spillover Feature

The Financial Transmission of Stress in the Global Economy

October 2012, Chapter 2,
Spillover Feature

The Great Divergence of Policies

April 2013, Box 1.1

Taper Talks: What to Expect When the United States Is Tightening

October 2013, Box 1.1

Credit Supply and Economic Growth

April 2014, Box 1.1

Should Advanced Economies Worry about Growth Shocks in Emerging Market Economies?	April 2014, Chapter 2,
Spillover Feature
Perspectives on Global Real Interest Rates

April 2014, Chapter 3

Housing Markets across the Globe: An Update

October 2014, Box 1.1

U.S. Monetary Policy and Capital Flows to Emerging Markets

April 2016, Box 2.2

A Transparent Risk-Management Approach to Monetary Policy

October 2016, Box 3.5

Will the Revival in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets Be Sustained?

October 2017, Box 1.2

188

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

SELECTED TOPICS

The Role of Financial Sector Repair in the Speed of the Recovery

October 2018, Box 2.3

Clarity of Central Bank Communications and the Extent of Anchoring of Inflation Expectations

October 2018, Box 3.2

VII. Labor Markets, Poverty, and Inequality
The Globalization of Labor

April 2007, Chapter 5

Emigration and Trade: How Do They Affect Developing Countries?

April 2007, Box 5.1

Labor Market Reforms in the Euro Area and the Wage-Unemployment Trade-Off

October 2007, Box 2.2

Globalization and Inequality

October 2007, Chapter 4

The Dualism between Temporary and Permanent Contracts: Measures, Effects, and Policy Issues

April 2010, Box 3.1

Short-Time Work Programs

April 2010, Box 3.2

Slow Recovery to Nowhere? A Sectoral View of Labor Markets in Advanced Economies

September 2011, Box 1.1

The Labor Share in Europe and the United States during and after the Great Recession

April 2012, Box 1.1

Jobs and Growth: Can’t Have One without the Other?

October 2012, Box 4.1

Reforming Collective-Bargaining Systems to Achieve High and Stable Employment

April 2016, Box 3.2

Understanding the Downward Trend in Labor Shares

April 2017, Chapter 3

Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies

October 2017, Box 1.1

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

October 2017, Chapter 2

Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level

October 2017, Box 2.1

Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-level Evidence

October 2017, Box 2.2

Wage and Employment Adjustment After the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-level Evidence

October 2017, Box 2.3

Labor Force Participation in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Prospects

April 2018, Chapter 2

Youth Labor Force Participation in Emerging Market and Developing Economies versus
Advanced Economies

April 2018, Box 2.1

Storm Clouds Ahead? Migration and Labor Force Participation Rates

April 2018, Box 2.4

Are Manufacturing Jobs Better Paid? Worker-Level Evidence from Brazil

April 2018, Box 3.3

The Global Financial Crisis, Migration, and Fertility

October 2018, Box 2.1

The Employment Impact of Automation Following the Global Financial Crisis:
The Case of Industrial Robots

October 2018, Box 2.2

VIII. Exchange Rate Issues
How Emerging Market Countries May Be Affected by External Shocks

September 2006, Box 1.3

Exchange Rates and the Adjustment of External Imbalances

April 2007, Chapter 3

Exchange Rate Pass-Through to Trade Prices and External Adjustment

April 2007, Box 3.3

Depreciation of the U.S. Dollar: Causes and Consequences

April 2008, Box 1.2

Lessons from the Crisis: On the Choice of Exchange Rate Regime

April 2010, Box 1.1

Exchange Rate Regimes and Crisis Susceptibility in Emerging Markets

April 2014, Box 1.4

Exchange Rates and Trade Flows: Disconnected?

October 2015, Chapter 3

The Relationship between Exchange Rates and Global-Value-Chain-Related Trade

October 2015, Box 3.1

Measuring Real Effective Exchange Rates and Competitiveness: The Role of Global Value Chains

October 2015, Box 3.2

Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies

October 2017, Box 1.1

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

October 2017, Chapter 2

Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level

October 2017, Box 2.1

Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence

October 2017, Box 2.2

Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence

October 2017, Box 2.3

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

189

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

IX. External Payments, Trade, Capital Movements, and Foreign Debt
Capital Flows to Emerging Market Countries: A Long-Term Perspective

September 2006, Box 1.1

How Will Global Imbalances Adjust?

September 2006, Box 2.1

External Sustainability and Financial Integration

April 2007, Box 3.1

Large and Persistent Current Account Imbalances

April 2007, Box 3.2

Multilateral Consultation on Global Imbalances

October 2007, Box 1.3

Managing the Macroeconomic Consequences of Large and Volatile Aid Flows

October 2007, Box 2.3

Managing Large Capital Inflows

October 2007, Chapter 3

Can Capital Controls Work?

October 2007, Box 3.1

Multilateral Consultation on Global Imbalances: Progress Report

April 2008, Box 1.3

How Does the Globalization of Trade and Finance Affect Growth? Theory and Evidence

April 2008, Box 5.1

Divergence of Current Account Balances across Emerging Economies

October 2008, Chapter 6

Current Account Determinants for Oil-Exporting Countries

October 2008, Box 6.1

Sovereign Wealth Funds: Implications for Global Financial Markets

October 2008, Box 6.2

Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis

April 2009, Box 1.4

Trade Finance and Global Trade: New Evidence from Bank Surveys

October 2009, Box 1.1

From Deficit to Surplus: Recent Shifts in Global Current Accounts

October 2009, Box 1.5

Getting the Balance Right: Transitioning out of Sustained Current Account Surpluses

April 2010, Chapter 4

Emerging Asia: Responding to Capital Inflows

October 2010, Box 2.1

Latin America-5: Riding Another Wave of Capital Inflows

October 2010, Box 2.2

Do Financial Crises Have Lasting Effects on Trade?

October 2010, Chapter 4

Unwinding External Imbalances in the European Union Periphery

April 2011, Box 2.1

International Capital Flows: Reliable or Fickle?

April 2011, Chapter 4

External Liabilities and Crisis Tipping Points

September 2011, Box 1.5

The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area

April 2013, Box 1.3

External Rebalancing in the Euro Area

October 2013, Box 1.3

The Yin and Yang of Capital Flow Management: Balancing Capital Inflows with Capital Outflows

October 2013, Chapter 4

Simulating Vulnerability to International Capital Market Conditions

October 2013, Box 4.1

The Trade Implications of the U.S. Shale Gas Boom

October 2014, Box 1.SF.1

Are Global Imbalances at a Turning Point?

October 2014, Chapter 4

Switching Gears: The 1986 External Adjustment

October 2014, Box 4.1

A Tale of Two Adjustments: East Asia and the Euro Area

October 2014, Box 4.2

Understanding the Role of Cyclical and Structural Factors in the Global Trade Slowdown

April 2015, Box 1.2

Small Economies, Large Current Account Deficits

October 2015, Box 1.2

Capital Flows and Financial Deepening in Developing Economies

October 2015, Box 1.3

Dissecting the Global Trade Slowdown

April 2016, Box 1.1

Understanding the Slowdown in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets

April 2016, Chapter 2

Capital Flows to Low-Income Developing Countries

April 2016, Box 2.1

The Potential Productivity Gains from Further Trade and Foreign Direct Investment Liberalization

April 2016, Box 3.3

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

October 2016, Chapter 2

The Evolution of Emerging Market and Developing Economies’ Trade Integration with
China’s Final Demand

April 2017, Box 2.3

Shifts in the Global Allocation of Capital: Implications for Emerging Market and
Developing Economies

April 2017, Box 2.4

Macroeconomic Adjustment in Emerging Market Commodity Exporters

October 2017, Box 1.4

Remittances and Consumption Smoothing

October 2017, Box 1.5

A Multidimensional Approach to Trade Policy Indicators

April 2018, Box 1.6

The Rise of Services Trade

April 2018, Box 3.2

190

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

SELECTED TOPICS

Role of Foreign Aid in Improving Productivity in Low-Income Developing Countries

April 2018, Box 4.3

Global Trade Tensions

October 2018, Scenario box

X. Regional Issues
EMU: 10 Years On

October 2008, Box 2.1

Vulnerabilities in Emerging Economies

April 2009, Box 2.2

East-West Linkages and Spillovers in Europe

April 2012, Box 2.1

The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area

April 2013, Box 1.3

Still Attached? Labor Force Participation Trends in European Regions

April 2018, Box 2.3

XI. Country-Specific Analyses
Why Is the U.S. International Income Account Still in the Black, and Will This Last?

September 2005, Box 1.2

Is India Becoming an Engine for Global Growth?

September 2005, Box 1.4

Saving and Investment in China

September 2005, Box 2.1

China’s GDP Revision: What Does It Mean for China and the Global Economy?

April 2006, Box 1.6

What Do Country Studies of the Impact of Globalization on Inequality Tell Us?
Examples from Mexico, China, and India

October 2007, Box 4.2

Japan after the Plaza Accord

April 2010, Box 4.1

Taiwan Province of China in the Late 1980s

April 2010, Box 4.2

Did the Plaza Accord Cause Japan’s Lost Decades?

April 2011, Box 1.4

Where Is China’s External Surplus Headed?

April 2012, Box 1.3

The U.S. Home Owners’ Loan Corporation

April 2012, Box 3.1

Household Debt Restructuring in Iceland

April 2012, Box 3.2

Abenomics: Risks after Early Success?

October 2013, Box 1.4

Is China’s Spending Pattern Shifting (away from Commodities)?

April 2014, Box 1.2

Public Investment in Japan during the Lost Decade

October 2014, Box 3.1

Japanese Exports: What’s the Holdup?

October 2015, Box 3.3

The Japanese Experience with Deflation

October 2016, Box 3.2

Permanently Displaced? Labor Force Participation in US States and Metropolitan Areas

April 2018, Box 2.2

XII. Special Topics
Climate Change and the Global Economy

April 2008, Chapter 4

Rising Car Ownership in Emerging Economies: Implications for Climate Change

April 2008, Box 4.1

South Asia: Illustrative Impact of an Abrupt Climate Shock

April 2008, Box 4.2

Macroeconomic Policies for Smoother Adjustment to Abrupt Climate Shocks

April 2008, Box 4.3

Catastrophe Insurance and Bonds: New Instruments to Hedge Extreme Weather Risks

April 2008, Box 4.4

Recent Emission-Reduction Policy Initiatives

April 2008, Box 4.5

Complexities in Designing Domestic Mitigation Policies

April 2008, Box 4.6

Getting By with a Little Help from a Boom: Do Commodity Windfalls Speed Up Human Development?

October 2015, Box 2.3

Breaking the Deadlock: Identifying the Political Economy Drivers of Structural Reforms

April 2016, Box 3.1

Can Reform Waves Turn the Tide? Some Case Studies Using the Synthetic Control Method

April 2016, Box 3.4

A Global Rush for Land

October 2016, Box 1.SF.1

Conflict, Growth, and Migration

April 2017, Box 1.1

Tackling Measurement Challenges of Irish Economic Activity

April 2017, Box 1.2

Within-Country Trends in Income per Capita: The Case of the Brazil, Russia, India, China,
and South Africa

April 2017, Box 2.1

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

191

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

Technological Progress and Labor Shares: A Historical Overview

April 2017, Box 3.1

The Elasticity of Substitution Between Capital and Labor: Concept and Estimation

April 2017, Box 3.2

Routine Tasks, Automation, and Economic Dislocation around the World

April 2017, Box 3.3

Adjustments to the Labor Share of Income

April 2017, Box 3.4

The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

October 2017, Chapter 3

The Growth Impact of Tropical Cyclones

October 2017, Box 3.1

The Role of Policies in Coping with Weather Shocks: A Model-Based Analysis

October 2017, Box 3.2

Strategies for Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: Selected Case Studies

October 2017, Box 3.3

Coping with Weather Shocks: The Role of Financial Markets

October 2017, Box 3.4

Historical Climate, Economic Development, and the World Income Distribution

October 2017, Box 3.5

Mitigating Climate Change

October 2017, Box 3.6

Smartphones and Global Trade

April 2018, Box 1.1

Has Mismeasurement of the Digital Economy Affected Productivity Statistics

April 2018, Box 1.4

The Changing Service Content of Manufactures

April 2018, Box 3.1

Patent Data and Concepts

April 2018, Box 4.1

International Technology Sourcing and Knowledge Spillovers

April 2018, Box 4.2

Relationship between Competition, Concentration, and Innovation

April 2018, Box 4.4

Increasing Market Power

October 2018, Box 1.1

Sharp GDP Declines: Some Stylized Facts

October 2018, Box 1.5

Predicting Recessions and Slowdowns: A Daunting Task

October 2018, Box 1.6

192

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

IMF EXECUTIVE BOARD DISCUSSION OF THE OUTLOOK,
OCTOBER 2018

The following remarks were made by the Chair at the conclusion of the Executive Board’s discussion of the
Fiscal Monitor, Global Financial Stability Report, and World Economic Outlook on September 20, 2018.

E

xecutive Directors broadly shared the
assessment of global economic prospects
and risks. They observed that the global
expansion, while remaining strong, has lost
some momentum and growth may have plateaued
in some major economies. Prospects increasingly
diverge among countries, reflecting differences in
policy stances and the combined impact of tighter
financial conditions, rising trade barriers, higher oil
prices, and increased geopolitical tensions. Beyond
2019, growth in most advanced economies is expected
to be held back by slow labor force growth and
weak labor productivity. In emerging market and
developing economies, growth is projected to remain
relatively robust, although income convergence toward
advanced economy levels would likely be less favorable
for countries undergoing substantial fiscal adjustment,
economic transformation, or conflicts.
Directors generally agreed that near-term risks to the
global outlook have recently shifted to the downside
and some have partially materialized. Trade barriers
have risen, with adverse consequences for investment
and growth. Financial conditions in most emerging
market and developing countries have tightened since
mid-April. Capital flows to some of these countries have
declined, reflecting weak fundamentals, higher political risks, and/or U.S. monetary policy normalization.
While financial conditions in advanced economies
remain broadly accommodative, an inflation surprise
could lead to an abrupt tightening of monetary policy
and to an intensification of market pressures across a
broader range of countries. In addition, most Directors
saw as key risks a further escalation of trade tensions,
a rise in political and policy uncertainties, and growing
inequality. Meanwhile, high debt levels limit the room
for maneuver in many countries.
Most Directors considered that the recent intensification of trade tensions and the potential for further
escalation pose a substantial risk to global growth and

welfare. They noted that unilateral trade actions and
retaliatory measures could disrupt global supply chains,
weaken investor confidence, and undermine broader
multilateral cooperation at a time when it is urgently
needed to address shared challenges. They therefore
urged all countries to adopt a cooperative approach to
promote growth in goods and services trade, reduce
trade costs, resolve disagreements without raising tariff
and nontariff barriers, and modernize the rules-based
multilateral trading system. The possibility of an
outcome in which trade issues could be resolved in
a positive way was also pointed out. Directors noted
that persistent large external imbalances continue to
call for sustained efforts, mindful of countries’ cyclical positions, to increase domestic growth potential in
surplus countries and to raise supply or rein in demand
in deficit countries.
Given a narrowing window of opportunity,
Directors underscored the urgency of policy measures
to sustain the expansion, strengthen resilience, and
raise medium-term growth prospects. They encouraged
countries to rebuild fiscal buffers where needed, and
implement growth-friendly measures calibrated to
avoid procyclicality and the risk of sharp drags on
activity. Directors agreed that, where inflation is below
target, continued monetary accommodation remains
appropriate. Where inflation is close to or above target,
monetary support should be withdrawn in a gradual,
data-dependent, and well-communicated manner.
Directors emphasized the critical role of structural
reforms in boosting potential output, ensuring that gains
are widely shared, and improving safety nets—including
to protect those vulnerable to structural change.
Most Directors shared the assessment that near-term
risks to financial stability have increased while mediumterm risks remain elevated. They highlighted, in particular, the buildup of financial vulnerabilities over the past
few years of very accommodative financial conditions,
including high and rising public and corporate debt,
International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

193

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH

and stretched asset valuations in some major markets.
Addressing these vulnerabilities remains an important
priority for many countries. For some countries, priorities include cleaning up bank balance sheets, improving
corporate governance, and addressing risks from the
sovereign-bank nexus, although a number of Directors felt
that regulatory issues pertaining to sovereign exposures
would best be left to the remit of the Basel Committee
on Banking Supervision, which is the standard-setting
body on the matter for a number of member countries.
Directors also stressed the importance of completing and
fully implementing the regulatory reform agenda, and of
avoiding a rollback of reforms that have contributed to a
more resilient financial system ten years after the global
financial crisis.
Directors agreed that financial regulators and supervisors should remain vigilant about potential threats to
financial stability and stand ready to act. They called
for special attention to liquidity conditions and new
risks, including those related to cybersecurity, financial technology, and other institutions or activities
outside the perimeter of prudential regulation. These
require policymakers to further develop policy tools,
including macroprudential policies, and deploy them
proactively as needed, as well as enhance coordination
across borders.
Directors stressed that, as monetary policy normalization proceeds in advanced economies, emerging
market and developing economies need to prepare for
an environment of tighter financial conditions and
higher volatility. Countries need to tackle their vulnerabilities and enhance resilience with an appropriate
mix of fiscal, monetary, exchange rate, and prudential
policies. In certain circumstances, capital flow management measures may be appropriate but not as a
substitute for macroeconomic adjustment. Directors
observed that markets have so far differentiated among
emerging market and developing economies based on

194

their fundamentals and idiosyncratic factors. In this
context, they underlined the importance of maintaining credible policy and institutional frameworks,
strengthening governance, and improving human
and physical capital. Directors noted that the current
environment highlights the need for the Fund to offer
granular, tailored policy advice and stand ready to provide financial support to its members as needed.
Directors underscored that priorities for low-income
developing countries include building resilience, lifting
potential growth, improving inclusiveness, and making
progress toward the 2030 Sustainable Development
Goals, while commodity exporters should also prioritize economic diversification. Stronger efforts are
needed to create room for development expenditure,
through broadening the tax base, improving revenue
administration, and prioritizing spending on health,
education, and infrastructure, while cutting wasteful
subsidies. Directors also called for urgent action to
contain debt vulnerabilities, which are rising in many
countries. They stressed that both debtors and creditors
share a responsibility for ensuring sustainable financing
practices and enhancing debt transparency.
Directors agreed that public sector balance sheet
analysis provides a useful tool to analyze public
finances. By revealing the full scale of public assets
in addition to debt and nondebt liabilities, it helps
governments identify risks and manage both assets and
liabilities, potentially reducing borrowing costs and
raising returns on assets. Directors noted that the longterm intertemporal analysis is particularly relevant in
aging societies. They also saw the benefits of the added
transparency in enriching the policy debate. At the
same time, Directors acknowledged that the balance
sheet approach still has limitations, notably data quality and differences in accounting practices hindering
cross-country comparisons, and thus it should be used
with caveats to complement traditional fiscal analysis.

International Monetary Fund | October 2018

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

Highlights from IMF Publications

Advancing the Frontiers of
Monetary Policy

The ASEAN Way: Sustaining
Growth and Stability

$30. English. Paperback
ISBN 978-1-48432-594-0. 296pp.

$25. English. Paperback
ISBN 978-1-51355-890-5. 308pp.

Race to the Next Income Frontier
$40. English. Paperback
ISBN 978-14843-0313-9. 430pp.

Finance & Development Magazine
$29 annual subscription fee.
Free to developing countries.
English ISSN 0145-1707

Realizing Indonesia’s Economic
Potential

Modernizing China:
Investing in Soft Infrastructure

$30. English. Paperback
ISBN 978-1-48433-714-1. 336pp.

$38. English. Paperback
ISBN 978-1-51353-994-2. 388pp.

To order, visit bookstore.imf.org/weo1018
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution

