As WFP entered its 60th year
of operations, the gap between
growing needs and available
resources continued to widen,
leaving the world facing a tipping
point where global food and
nutrition needs outstripped the
capacity of many countries to
prevent excess mortality, secure
future stability and build resilient
livelihoods. Along with partners,
WFP sought to meet this challenge
and prevent future shocks from
sparking another global food
crisis by building on innovations,
renewed partnerships and its
commitment to excellence.

soaring inflation, with basic food prices becomin

2022 was the year of the polycrisis. Multiple

working collectively with the whole UN system, we

emergencies overlapped to create the largest and

also successfully negotiated access to provide

most complex hunger and humanitarian crisis in

humanitarian assistance. This helped to prevent

over 70 years. The economic aftershocks of the

food insecurity from reaching catastrophic levels

COVID-19 pandemic, persistent and escalating

in several countries. This collective effort helped t

conflicts, and the rising number and scale o

avert famine in countries such as Afghanistan and

extreme weather events in what was recorded

Somalia.

as the second-warmest year in modern history
— with droughts and floods affecting millions
2022 — combined with the ripple effects of the wa
in Ukraine to push global food, fuel and fertilizer
prices to record highs and spark the worst refugee
crisis in a decade.

prohibitive for many. This resulted in a record
349 million people experiencing acute hunger, with
some 772,000 teetering on the edge of famine.
WFP put its Strategic Plan into action by leveraging
multiple and wide-ranging partnerships. WFP
collaborated with a wide spectrum of partners
to deliver emergency food, cash and nutrition
assistance, provide logistics services, reinforce
national social protection systems, offe
climate-adaptive solutions and strengthen the
resilience of communities. Working together with
governments, UN agencies, the International Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement, international
and local NGOs, international financial institutions
(IFIs), the private sector, academia, think tanks and
others, WFP was able to step up and provide vital
food and nutrition assistance to nearly 160 million
people – a new annual record. In conflict zones,

Yet, amid pressures to save (even more) lives,
WFP and partners also continued to address
root causes of hunger, diversifying food security
options for the future, building and delivering
solutions that seamlessly span the humanitarian,
development and climate contexts, and laying

Needs reached unprecedented levels. Disrupted

down a sustainable pathway to resilience,

grain exports from Ukraine threatened to have

stability, self-reliance and economic prosperity.

devastating consequences for many countries

This included leveraging national social

already on the brink, including Afghanistan,

protection schemes, including school feeding,

Ethiopia, South Sudan, Syria and Yemen, while

and strengthening food systems. WFP invested in

lower-income countries faced mounting debt and

scalable solutions, working to integrate climate
adaptation across its work.
1

WFP maintained its leadership as
a provider of common services for
the humanitarian and development

Innovating for humanity

community. WFP planes, ships and trucks

Our remote-sensing Cloud to Street platform

moved humanitarian supplies and cargo,

predicts, maps and analyses floods in real time.

and more than 390,000 passengers, to
hundreds of destinations. At the same
time, we continued to adopt a coordinated,
scalable and sustainable approach to

In 2022, it supported 31 governments
and institutions, and enabled the mapping of
169 countries and the monitoring of
500 million people.

measure and reduce our environmental

School Meal Programme PLUS, an Artificial-

impact, in coordination with other

Intelligence-powered tool creating school

humanitarian organizations.

menus that are affordable, nutritious and
use locally sourced and culturally acceptable
ingredients, reached more than 3 million
children in 2022.

WFP climate resilience work
WFP’s experience in managing risks and
vulnerabilities through preparedness and
early-warning systems meant we could
reach over 15 million people, empowering
them to prepare for and better mitigate
the effects of climate-related shocks.
WFP also negotiated microinsurance
coverage against losses from weather
extremes in 14 countries. Our work in
climate resilience was supported through
a variety of innovative tools, including
remote sensing to predict, map and
analyse floods in real time.
WFP leveraged innovations and new ways of
working in support of its mandate and the
humanitarian sector. WFP’s innovation work
spanned its global footprint, as artificial
intelligence, blockchain, biotechnology,
edge computing and robotics, as well as
mainstream innovative products, were
deployed in support of our work, reaching
over 37 million people worldwide.

2 | ANNUAL REVIEW 2022

2022 also saw unprecedented all-round

We are truly grateful to all our generous donors

commitment to turning the tide against hunger.

in 2022, whose valued support enabled us to

WFP staff, the majority of whom serve in remot

reach a record 160 million people. Thanks to

and dangerous locations, continued to work

innovative fundraising efforts, the private secto

with unyielding commitment and dedication.

became WFP’s fourth-largest donor. However,

Our steadfast donors and partners, including

funding still fell dangerously short of needs, as

governments, IFIs, private foundations and

inflation, supply chain disruptions and othe

individuals, provided a record US$14.1 billion

factors increased WFP’s food procurement costs

to save lives and stabilize livelihoods, delivering

by 39 percent between 2019 and 2022.

nearly 50 percent more resources than in 2021.

3

UNPRECEDENTED
CRISES
Faced with a situation of such magnitude

first-hand knowledge and expertise of the

and complexity, stakeholders from across

countries and communities we support. By

the food and nutrition security sector came

combining and leveraging complementary

together to join forces. Across the globe,

resources, experience and expertise, our

WFP works collaboratively with thousands of

partnerships help us reach the people we serve

partners, including governments, the private

in the most effective, efficient and tailored

sector, UN agencies, IFIs and NGOs. Of our

manner, reduce costs and find innovative

1,000+ NGO partners, 85 percent are local

solutions to problems.

organizations, equipped with long-standing,

>>

Partnerships in action
After the eruption of full-scale war in
Ukraine in February 2022, WFP worked with
government authorities and more than 180
humanitarian partners, including local NGOs,
to set up operations from scratch and begin
distributions in a matter of weeks. Together,
we provided food and cash assistance
equivalent to 1.3 billion meals to war-affected
families, 85 percent of whom were located
in areas near the frontlines. More than 18
organizations used WFP’s Building Blocks
platform to coordinate cash assistance.
The platform uses blockchain technology,
which records information in a secure way
and can coordinate various humanitarian

The savings generated meant that an
additional 185,000 people could be reached.
Ukraine was one of three countries where
Building Blocks was used in 2022, serving in
total 4 million people and saving US$3 million
in bank fees.
In Sudan, a joint programme with UNICEF
sought to provide long-term solutions
and address underlying barriers to peace,
stability and development for nearly
300,000 vulnerable people. Recent events
in the country underline the need for such a
collaborative and integrated approach that
includes creating sustainable food systems
and strengthening community-based networks
to address local conflicts and develop trust

organizations’ assistance packages.

UNIFIED
RESPONSE

4 | ANNUAL REVIEW 2022

5

Joint action was key in complex humanitarian

assistance to those most in need. In

scenarios. As conflict, hunger and extreme

North Kivu, in the Democratic Republic

weather events continued to drive up refugee

of the Congo, where all humanitarian

numbers, support continued to be provided

operations were previously suspended,

through the UNHCR-WFP Joint Hub, which spans

WFP was able to operate across conflic

the humanitarian-development spectrum to

lines after humanitarian negotiations by

ensure people can meet their basic food and

our in-country Security and Access and

other essential needs, while at the same time

Humanitarian-Military Interaction teams.

strengthening livelihoods, supporting inclusion
and increasing self-reliance. In Mali, the Joint
Hub helped improve targeting and community
engagement, feedback and appeals.

WFP’s logistical strength and expertise
was put at the service of the humanitarian
community. This allowed a variety of
humanitarian actors to continue operating,

In many crisis situations, our ability to reach

including in extremely challenging

remote and insecure corners of the world

contexts. In 2022, we transported almost

came to the fore, enabling us to deliver vital

391,000 people from 732 organizations
and more than 7,000 metric tons of light
humanitarian cargo to 540 destinations,
through the United Nations Humanitarian
Air Service. The WFP-managed United
Nations Humanitarian Response Depot
network dispatched 43,900 m³ of relief
items and support equipment to
135 countries via five strategically
positioned hubs, while the Logistics
Cluster provided coordination, information
management and access to common
services for almost 500 humanitarian
partners. The WFP-led Emergency
Telecommunications Cluster provided vital
technical and information-management
support to operations in 11 countries.
WFP and UNHCR set up an independent
service – UN FLEET – to help sister UN
organizations lease the most appropriate
vehicles for their operations and handle
procurement, vehicle preparation and
shipping. The coordinated approach should
cut costs, lower emissions and increase
road safety.

6 | ANNUAL REVIEW 2022

Partnering for the future
Along with partners including FAO
and IFAD, WFP supported countries in
deploying innovative school feeding
programmes that also addressed
the climate emergency, transformed
food systems and reduced the carbon
footprint by buying food locally.
Together with UNFPA and UNICEF,
we delivered on the Breaking
Barriers to Education initiative in
Chad and Niger. This addressed key
barriers to schooling for girls, by
providing fortified school meals and
targeted services related to sexual
and reproductive health and rights,
and gender-based violence, as well
as mentoring and coaching. Over
127,000 children and adolescents
were reached in 2022. WFP also
strengthened its strategic partnership
with Education Cannot Wait: the first
global, multilateral fund dedicated
to education in emergencies. This
included adding school meals as
a priority intervention in its new
Strategic Plan – paving the way for
more financing for programmes in
fragile countries. Our partnership
with Global Partnership for Education
– the largest global fund solely
dedicated to transforming education
in lower-income countries – saw an
increase in its financing for school
meals for priority countries, work with
WFP on joint advocacy at the global
level, and research into new and
innovative financing opportunities.

7

FOOD AND
NUTRITION
SECURITY AS
A POLITICAL
PRIORITY

In the face of the multilayered,
multidimensional polycrisis at
hand, the international community
came together to provide a powerful
and unified response with practical
solutions, placing food and nutrition
security at the heart of the global
political agenda. The result was
compelling and coordinated advocacy
for action at the highest level, the like of
which the world had rarely seen before.

Black Sea Grain Initiative
Negotiations brokered by the United
Nations and Türkiye in July, to resume
shipments of Ukrainian and Russian
grain and fertilizer into global markets,
enabled WFP to transport more than
380,000 metric tons of wheat through
various Black Sea ports. A further
agreement was struck between the
Russian Federation and the United
Nations, to send fertilizer from Russian
producers to developing countries.
The UN Secretary-General asked WFP
to transport 20,000 metric tons of
fertilizer, produced by the Russian
company Uralchem and donated to
the Government of Malawi, in
November 2022. WFP is immensely
grateful to the many donors who
stepped up with swift and unwavering
support to generously fund the
additional purchase, transport,
programme and distribution costs, so
that WFP could reach those in need
through the grain initiative.

8 | ANNUAL REVIEW 2022

G7 leaders meeting in Germany in June 2022

decision by World Trade Organization Member

agreed an additional US$4.5 billion to protect

States to exempt our humanitarian food

the world’s most vulnerable people from hunger

purchases from export restrictions.

and malnutrition. Further support came from
the Global Alliance for Food Security – an alliance
jointly convened by the G7 Presidency and the
World Bank Group to catalyse an immediate
and concerted response to the unfolding global
hunger crisis – which launched a Global Food
and Nutrition Security Dashboard in November
to fast-track a rapid response.

Political will was also stepped up in climate
action. In a significant development, and afte
decades of advocacy, world leaders attending
the UN Climate Change Conference (COP27) in
Egypt in November agreed to establish a loss
and damage fund to compensate vulnerable
countries on the frontlines of the climate crisis.
With a multi-nation committee due to report

WFP’s efforts to ensure the effective functioni

back to COP28 in December 2023 on how the

of food supply chains across its broader

fund will be developed, WFP will advocate for

operations, in response to the global challenges

solutions that protect local communities and

linked to the war in Ukraine, received a major

assist them in avoiding dependence on debt or

boost in July 2022, following the approval of a

repeated assistance.

Grand Bargain shows its value
with cash model
WFP joined forces with donors, NGOs, the Red
Cross and International Red Cross Movement,
and other UN agencies, to develop a cash
coordination model that will enhance the
effectiveness of this vital component of social
protection. The approach – born out of The
Grand Bargain between large donors and
organizations for improved humanitarian
action – includes greater involvement of
national and local groups in cash programmes,
and closer involvement of, and accountability
to, crisis-affected people. A global Cash
Advisory Group including WFP was created to
support country-level cash working groups
transitioning to the new model by March 2024,
with OCHA and UNHCR as Secretariat.

9

National governments were front and centre in

to address needs mainly in crisis hotspots. In

driving activities to curb hunger and

September, the IMF approved a temporary

promote development in their countries. In

Food Shock Window – under its emergency

support of this, IFIs stepped up as fundamental

financing instrument, the Rapid Credit Facilit

players. At the start of 2022, IFIs joined forces to

and Rapid Financing Instrument – with additional

announce an action plan to help combat rising

funds for countries facing urgent balance-of-

food insecurity. Institutions including the African

payment issues.

Development Bank, the Asian Development
Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development, the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) pledged
to bring their financing, policy engagement
technical assistance and knowledge to address
the rapidly escalating crisis, in a fast-tracked
and scaled-up approach. In May, the World Bank
announced a US$30 billion food and nutrition
security package, including US$12 billion for new
projects to respond to the food crisis. This was in
addition to US$748 million previously set aside

10 | A N N U A L R E V I E W 2 0 2 2

NATIONAL
GOVERNMENTS
LEAD ON
RESPONSE
EFFORTS

National governments recognized WFP’s value

their money through digital payments. This

added in the humanitarian and development

commitment to economic empowerment and

space, in addressing hunger and malnutrition.

financial inclusion resonated with WFP’s drive to

Governments chose WFP to implement US$647

support the unleashing of women’s economic

million worth of agreements with IFIs. More than

power as the best way to achieve gender equality

80 percent of these were for crisis response,

and lift millions of people out of poverty and food

though the activities themselves demonstrated

insecurity.

how WFP’s expertise spans the humanitarian

>>

and development spectrum. In total, WFP
signed US$1 billion in contributions and service
provision agreements from IFI sources in 2022 –
compared with US$20 million in 2019.
Somalia was among the top ten government
donors to WFP activities. Using US$135 million
from the World Bank, the Government and WFP
reached 183,000 rural families with nutritionlinked cash transfers – to be expanded to a
further 20,000 urban families in 2023 – and
provided emergency cash transfers to 155,000
drought-affected families. The principal recipients
of all cash transfers under the Government-led
Baxnaano safety net were women, who received

Government of Pakistan and WFP work together
for better mother and child nutrition
In Pakistan, we partnered with the Government to address high levels of mother and child
malnutrition, which had been compounded by the impact of mega-monsoon rains and
extreme heatwaves on food production and availability. WFP worked through the national
social safety net to deliver an integrated package of nutritious food, health, supplementary
cash and other support. The Government provided WFP with US$204 million to implement
the multi-year programme, with an aim to reach 1.7 million women and children over the
next three years. WFP also worked through the national social safety net, in collaboration
with other UN agencies and partners, to deliver additional health and nutrition services
and ensure a coordinated, multisector approach. By December 2022, the project had been
implemented through 247 facilitation centres in 102 districts.

11

National governments also increasingly
recognized the importance of school feeding
for their countries’ development and economic
perspectives. They were active players in school
feeding, with low-income countries receiving WFP
technical assistance increasing their domestic
funding for school meals from 27 percent in
2020 to 41 percent in 2022. WFP support enabled
governments to assist 107 million children
through national programmes.
In Rwanda, WFP helped the Government design
and roll out a national programme that was
supporting 3.8 million children by 2022, up from
640,000 two years earlier. This resulted in the
Government meeting early a 2021 commitment
to achieve universal school meals coverage
within two years. In Honduras, where COVID-19
and drought worsened malnutrition levels,
WFP supported the Government in reviving the
national school meals programme to reach
1.3 million children. In Benin, WFP’s support
meant that 70 percent of the food bought for
school meals was locally grown.

12 | A N N U A L R E V I E W 2 0 2 2

The School Meals Coalition
A prime example of strategic partnership
in action, the Coalition grew to 74
countries and 76 partner organizations
during its first full year. It was supported
by over 80 stakeholders including major
UN agencies and development partners.
With WFP as Secretariat, the country-led
coalition increased global investment in
school meals from US$43 billion in 2020
to US$48 billion in 2022 – with 99 percent
of that funding coming from national
governments’ own budgets. This broad,
multilateral approach meant that 418
million children benefited from school
meals worldwide – 30 million more than
before the COVID-19 pandemic. Strong
political will, channelled through the
coalition, was key to this resurgence.

13

The investment made so far in our Private
Sector Strategy since 2020 is bearing fruit.
Over half a billion dollars was secured this
year from the private sector – our highestever total and more than double the initial
2022 forecast. The strength of the private
sector in driving WFP’s operations with rapid
and flexible funds was highlighted in
Ukraine, where it represented the secondlargest donor of funds. Individuals provided
WFP with over US$104 million in 2022,
up from US$91 million the previous year.
This included US$23.7 million from our
ShareTheMeal app and US$8.9 million from
high net-worth individuals.

PRIVATE
SECTOR
STEPS UP
WITH VITAL
RESOURCES
The role of the private sector as a key
development partner is particularly relevant
in the nutrition space. WFP’s efforts to
mobilize and engage with the sector include
acting as co-convenor of the SUN
(Scaling Up Nutrition) Business Network,
whose over 1,500 business members
(predominantly small- and medium-sized
enterprises) are committed to addressing
malnutrition through their business models
14 | A N N U A L R E V I E W 2 0 2 2

and practices. WFP also advocates for business
engagement in support of national nutrition
priorities.
Strategic private partnerships also allowed
us to increase funding for, and the impact of,
our programmes and operations. Taste and
nutrition company Kerry Group worked with
WFP to support vulnerable dairy farmers in
Burundi, equipping them with skills to increase
production and incomes, while improving
nutrition in schools and communities. By the
end of 2022, Kerry had helped train hundreds
of farmers in Burundi’s Gitega province, while
unlocking regular access to nutritious, locally
sourced milk for 3,100 schoolchildren.
>>

15

Renewing and nurturing long-standing
partnerships is crucial for sustaining
resources and innovative approaches for
impact. WFP’s 15-year partnership with the
health, nutrition and bioscience company
Royal DSM was renewed for a further three
years, to continue a global scale-up of WFP’s
fortification programmes – one of the mos
scientifically proven and cost-effective wa
of tackling micronutrient deficiencies o
a large scale, which WFP is implementing
in 40 countries. Partnering with the Bill &
Melinda Gates Foundation, WFP leveraged
national social protection to promote the
in-country fortification agenda in Ethiopi
through a US$5 million grant. At the end of
2022, we also welcomed a US$10.7 million
grant from the Rockefeller Foundation to
help vulnerable children in Benin, Ghana,
Honduras and India gain better access
to nutritious food through school meal
programmes – including through a focus on
fortified foods
Further forms of sustainable and innovative
financing were essential as needs continue
to escalate and funding struggled to keep
pace. Pioneering mechanisms deployed
by WFP include SheCan, which combines
crowdfunded capital from individual “impact”
lenders with WFP’s donor funds to financ
microloans that drive women’s economic
empowerment. The model was launched in
Zambia, Rwanda and Peru, where it reached
more than 10,000 people.

16 | A N N U A L R E V I E W 2 0 2 2

Partnering for
a greener WFP
In support of WFP’s efforts to increase
the environmental sustainability of its
operations, global packaging and paper
company Mondi helped enhance the
packaging used in our humanitarian
programmes, so we could deliver
more safe and nutritious food to more
people in need, while preventing food
loss and waste and curbing our carbon
footprint.

17

PATHWAY
Rolling back a global food and nutrition
crisis of this magnitude requires
continued, intensive and collective action
and political will. This is a multilayered
crisis that demands a multidimensional
response, involving smart, agile and
intelligent coordination among all parties.
Only in this way can we mitigate the impact
of conflicts, address the climate crisis, keep
food commodities moving freely and support
national governments in putting the right
safety nets in place.

OUT OF
The disastrous impacts of climate, conflict,
rising costs and economic instability on the
global food security situation are here to stay.
The existing depth of political support and
engagement for rapid and effective action
must be carried forward, including advocacy
at the highest levels that provides a voice
to people in the most fragile and vulnerable
settings.

HUNGER

18 | A N N U A L R E V I E W 2 0 2 2

The cost of failure is millions of people who rely

initiatives and to the climate targets that will be

on WFP’s assistance having their only lifeline

further addressed at COP28 in late 2023. WFP

snatched away. WFP will continue to push for

knows it can count on the continuing assistance

collective solutions and collaborative measures

of our long-standing donors, but will work

that both enable an impactful response

relentlessly to identify and secure new funding

and drive more fundamental change – from

opportunities.

negotiating access to insecure areas, to urging

>>

political commitment from all parties to peace

19

The role of national governments will be crucial.
They should be further encouraged to prioritize
actions that meet people’s immediate food and
nutrition needs, with IFIs continuing as vital
partners who can help finance the nationa
programmes required for sustainable change.
WFP stands ready to further support these
efforts, using six decades of experience an
global reach to help implement programmes
that also build resilience and arrest the
destructive cycle of recurring hunger.
Partnerships, efficiency and innovation wi
continue to be our guiding stars. To repel this
historic tide of hunger, WFP will continue to
work hand-in-hand with UN agencies and NGOs,
Member States and actors from across multiple
sectors. We will seek efficiency gains at ea
turn, so that every single dollar goes as far as
possible. We will seek new donors, increasing
private sector funding as well as alliances with
companies equipped with the technology to
make our humanitarian operations as cutting
edge and efficient as possible, building on
innovation culture that fully harnesses the
power of science and data. We will further
continue leading from the front in strengthening

20 | A N N U A L R E V I E W 2 0 2 2

real-time analysis of hunger and vulnerability,
achieving the highest standards of funds
stewardship and accountability, and managing
the vast logistics services required to move
humanitarians and cargo to wherever they are
required, including in the most remote and
fragile environments.
Food security is the bedrock of any successful
strategy to reduce poverty and support
sustainable development. It is not enough
to postpone famine. We need to banish it by
working in unison to address the underlying
causes of hunger and by equipping communities
and countries with the means to emerge
from poverty and harness their vast human
capital and potential. Working together and in
partnership, we can consign this global food and
nutrition crisis to history and chart a path to a
world with zero hunger.
21

OUR
DONORS

We are hugely grateful to all of the donors and partners who put
their trust in WFP and enabled us to reach more people than
ever, during a year of extraordinary challenges. Thank you.

PRIVATE
DONORS
United States of America
US$7.2BN
(US$16.6M)

Germany
US$1.8BN
(US$697.2M)

European
Commission
US$698M

Private donors
US$540M
(US$31.2M)

Canada
US$443M
(US$29.3M)

United Kingdom
US$418M
(US$59.3M)

Japan
US$265M

Sweden
 S$258M
U
(US$145.6M)

UN other funds
& agencies*
US$180M

UN CERF
US$177M

Norway
US$172M
(US$59.5M)

France
US$166M
(US$23.8M)

Somalia
US$135M

Asian
Development Bank
US$135M

World Bank
US$126M

Republic of Korea
US$115M
(US$4.1M)

Australia
US$113M
(US$29M)

Switzerland
US$109M
(US$23.2M)

Netherlands
US$107M
(US$75.4M)

United Arab
Emirates
US$90M

Figures in brackets represent flexible funding within overall total

22 | A N N U A L R E V I E W 2 0 2 2

United States
of America
Germany
European Commission
Private Donors
Canada
United Kingdom of
Great Britain and
Northern Ireland

Haiti

Hungary

Namibia

Finland

Malawi

Slovakia

Ireland

Czechia

Portugal

Saudi Arabia

UN Peacebuilding
Fund

Panama

Russian Federation
Bangladesh
Belgium
Honduras

Japan

Chad

Sweden

India

UN Other Funds and
Agencies*

Burkina Faso

UN CERF
Norway
France
Somalia
Asian Development
Bank
World Bank
Republic of Korea
Australia
Switzerland
Netherlands
(Kingdom of the)

Luxembourg
Spain
Colombia
Ukraine
Pakistan
Democratic Republic
of the Congo

Kuwait

Israel

Lesotho

Thailand

Cambodia

Equatorial Guinea

Côte d’Ivoire

Serbia

Poland

Croatia

Slovenia

Micronesia (Federated
States of)

Brazil
Timor-Leste
Monaco
Ecuador

China

Malaysia

Gambia

Bolivia (Plurinational
State of)

Qatar

Denmark

Cyprus

Indonesia

UN country-based
pooled funds

Italy

Nicaragua

New Zealand

Togo

Ethiopia

United Republic of
Tanzania

El Salvador

Burundi

Iceland
Peru
Madagascar
Sierra Leone
Central African
Republic

Bulgaria

Philippines

Austria

United Arab Emirates

African Development
Bank

Ghana

Zimbabwe
Nepal
Kyrgyzstan
Liechtenstein
Tajikistan
Guinea-Bissau
Egypt
Greece

Argentina
Estonia
Congo
Andorra
Kazakhstan
Malta
Mauritius
Eswatini
Development Bank of
Latin America
Armenia
Chile
Green Climate Fund
Fiji
Mexico
Bhutan
Sri Lanka

Order of donors by total contribution
* Excluding CERF

23

Photo credits
Page 2: People seek refuge from heavy
monsoon rains that struck Pakistan
from mid-June. Hundreds of thousands
of people were left without access to
food, clean water, shelter or basic
healthcare. WFP/Haris Khalid
Page 3: Mariam receives a monthly
WFP food basket containing wheat flour,
vegetable oil and pulses, as part of
WFP’s food assistance to nearly
13 million people in Yemen.
WFP/Ahmed Basha

Page 8: The WFP-chartered MV
Antheia carries wheat grain from the
Ukrainian port of Chornomorsk to the
Turkish port of Samsun, for milling into
wheat flour and onward transport to
WFP operations in Afghanistan. Such
shipments were made possible by the
Black Sea Grain Initiative.
WFP/Turkish Government
Page 9: A woman receives cash
assistance at a camp for internally
displaced persons in North Kivu in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. WFP/
Michael Castofas

Page 5: Olena receives a WFP food box
from a Ukrainian Red Cross volunteer
in Druzhkivka city, Donetsk oblast.
WFP partnered with the Ukrainian
Red Cross to distribute food boxes
to approximately 1,500 war-affected
people each month in Druzhkivka.
WFP/Antoine Vallas

Page 10: Ayan attends the WFP-funded
Kabasa Health Center for a check-up of
her 15-month-old daughter Mushtaq
and to pick up nutritional supplements.
Ayan and her family fled to Dolow in
Somalia to escape Al-Shabaab and
unrelenting drought.
WFP/Samantha Reinders

Page 6: Alina and her daughters
Milana, aged 5, and Violetta, 1, outside
their home in Chernihiv region, Ukraine,
which was damaged by a missile strike.
She receives food vouchers from WFP so
the family can afford to eat, with food
prices rising 22 percent since last year.
WFP/Antoine Vallas

Page 11: Abdul and Hajani Sattar
with their children Abdul Jabba,12,
Muhammad Umer, 3, og Sawira, 5,
and baby Shaikila, 40 days old. The
family, from the Sindh province of
Pakistan, receive money under the BISP
Nahonuma programme, which they
spend on food and clothes for their
children. WFP/Marco Frattini

Page 7: Children queue for lunch
at Gudele West Primary School in
South Sudan. WFP’s school meals
allow children to learn and perform
better, broadening their educational
opportunities. WFP/Eulalia Berlanga

To view the report online visit:
wfp.org/in2022

24 | A N N U A L R E V I E W 2 0 2 2

Page 12-13: Students enjoy a hot
meal at a public elementary school in
Fingninkanmè, Benin, as part of WFP
school-meal activities. The school was
one of five to receive almost 3 metric
tons of maize provided by Gbenonkpo
smallholder farmers’ cooperative.
WFP/Richard Mbouet

Page 14-15: WFP staff check off milk
cartons in Burundi, where WFP school
meals include a strong emphasis on
sourcing locally from smallholder
farmers. WFP/Arete/Fredrik Lerneryd
Page 16-17: Boxes of high-energy
biscuits are carried across the
Bandarban Sangu River in
Bangladesh. WFP provided support to
the Government with at-home biscuit
distributions for Bangladeshi children,
while school were closed during the
COVID-19 outbreak. WFP/Sayed Asif
Page 19: Hason Ara Begum, a
participant in WFP’s livelihoods
programme for the host community in
Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh, prepares an
eggplant curry lunch with vegetables
collected from her farm.
WFP/Sayed Asif Mahmud
Page 20-21: WFP staff member
Deborah Suc (right), who belongs to
the Poqomchi’ people and is currently
a field technician, works with local
communities in the municipality of San
Cristóbal, department of Alta Verapaz,
Guatemala. WFP/Nelson Pacheco

© World Food Programme 2023
All Rights Reserved.
The designations employed and
the presentation of material in this
information product do not imply
the expression of any opinion on the
part of the World Food Programme
concerning the legal or development
status of any territory, country,
city or area or of its authorities, or
concerning the delimitation of its
frontiers or boundaries.

World Food Programme
Via Cesare Giulio Viola 68/70,
00148 Rome, Italy - T +39 06 65131
wfp.org

