AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL
Amnesty International is a movement of 10 million people which
mobilizes the humanity in everyone and campaigns for change so we
can all enjoy our human rights. Our vision is of a world where those in
power keep their promises, respect international law and are held to
account. We are independent of any government, political ideology,
economic interest or religion and are funded mainly by our
membership and individual donations. We believe that acting in
solidarity and compassion with people everywhere can change our
societies for the better.
Amnesty International is impartial. We take no position on issues of
sovereignty, territorial disputes or international political or legal
arrangements that might be adopted to implement the right to selfdetermination. Given this and our interest in highlighting state
accountability, we organize our information on human rights in the
world primarily according to the division of states that are
accountable for the human rights situation on their territory.

First published in 2024 by
Amnesty International Ltd
Peter Benenson House,
1, Easton Street,
London WC1X 0DW
United Kingdom
© Amnesty International 2024
Index: POL 10/7200/2024
ISBN: 978-0-86210-509-9
Original language: English
Except where otherwise noted,
content in this document is
licensed under a
CreativeCommons (attribution,
non-commercial, no derivatives,
international 4.0) licence.
https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/legalcode

This report documents key human
rights developments at a
national and regional level
during 2023, as well as
presenting a global analysis of
ongoing critical human rights
challenges. It includes entries on
countries or territories whose
human rights situation Amnesty
International has monitored
during 2023.

The absence of a particular
country or territory does not imply
that no human rights violations
of concern to Amnesty
International took place there
during the year. Nor is the length
of a country entry any basis for a
comparison of the extent and
depth of Amnesty International’s
concerns there. This report does
not cover extensively the use of
the death penalty as Amnesty
International issues a separate
annual global report on death
sentences and executions.

For more information please visit
the permissions page on our
website: www.amnesty.org
amnesty.org

ii

The State of the World’s Human Rights

THE STATE OF
THE WORLD’S
HUMAN RIGHTS
APRIL 2024

iv

The State of the World’s Human Rights

CONTENTS
THE STATE OF THE WORLD’S HUMAN
RIGHTS
Abbreviations vii
Preface ix
Global Analysis 14
Africa regional overview 24
Americas regional overview 33
Asia-Pacific regional overview 41
Europe and Central Asia regional
overview 50
Middle East and North Africa
regional overview 59
Country entries 69
Afghanistan 70
Albania 73
Algeria 74
Andorra 77
Angola 78
Argentina 80
Armenia 82
Australia 84
Austria 85
Azerbaijan 87
Bahrain 89
Bangladesh 91
Belarus 94
Belgium 96
Benin 98
Bhutan 99
Bolivia 100
Bosnia and Herzegovina 101
Botswana 103
Brazil 104
Bulgaria 109
Burkina Faso 110
Burundi 113
Cambodia 116
Cameroon 118
Canada 119
Central African Republic 122
Chad 123
Chile 125
China 127
Colombia 134

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Congo 138
Côte d’Ivoire 139
Croatia 141
Cuba 142
Cyprus 144
Czech Republic 145
Democratic Republic of the
Congo 147
Denmark 151
Dominican Republic 152
Ecuador 153
Egypt 155
El Salvador 160
Equatorial Guinea 162
Eritrea 164
Eswatini 165
Ethiopia 166
Fiji 168
Finland 169
France 171
Gambia 174
Georgia 176
Germany 178
Ghana 181
Greece 182
Guatemala 186
Guinea Republic 187
Haiti 189
Honduras 190
Hungary 192
India 194
Indonesia 198
Iran 201
Iraq 206
Ireland 210
Israel and the Occupied
Palestinian Territories 211
Italy 216
Japan 218
Jordan 220
Kazakhstan 223
Kenya 225

v

Kosovo 228
Kuwait 229
Kyrgyzstan 231
Laos 233
Latvia 235
Lebanon 236
Lesotho 239
Libya 240
Lithuania 245
Madagascar 246
Malawi 248
Malaysia 249
Maldives 251
Mali 252
Malta 255
Mauritania 256
Mexico 258
Moldova 262
Mongolia 264
Montenegro 265
Morocco/Western Sahara 266
Mozambique 269
Myanmar 271
Namibia 274
Nepal 276
Netherlands 278
New Zealand 279
Nicaragua 280
Niger 281
Nigeria 283
North Korea 286
North Macedonia 288
Norway 290
Oman 291
Pakistan 292
Palestine (State of) 296
Papua New Guinea 300
Paraguay 301
Peru 303
Philippines 305
Poland 307
Portugal 310
Puerto Rico 311
Qatar 313
Romania 314
Russia 316
Rwanda 320
Saudi Arabia 323
Senegal 326
Serbia 328

vi

Sierra Leone 330
Singapore 332
Slovakia 333
Slovenia 334
Somalia 335
South Africa 338
South Korea 342
South Sudan 344
Spain 347
Sri Lanka 350
Sudan 352
Sweden 355
Switzerland 356
Syria 357
Taiwan 361
Tajikistan 362
Tanzania 365
Thailand 367
Togo 370
Tunisia 371
Türkiye 375
Turkmenistan 379
Uganda 381
Ukraine 383
United Arab Emirates 388
United Kingdom 390
United States of America 393
Uruguay 398
Uzbekistan 400
Venezuela 402
Viet Nam 407
Yemen 409
Zambia 412
Zimbabwe 414

The State of the World’s Human Rights

ABBREVIATIONS
ASEAN
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
AU
African Union
BRICS summit
The annual conference of the BRICS (Brazil,
Russia, India, China and South Africa) group
of nations

European Committee for the Prevention of
Torture
European Committee for the Prevention of
Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment
European Convention on Human Rights
(European) Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
GDP
Gross domestic product

CEDAW
UN Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women

ICC
International Criminal Court

CEDAW Committee
UN Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women

ICCPR
International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights

CERD
International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination

ICESCR
International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights

CERD Committee
UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination

ICRC
International Committee of the Red Cross

CIA
US Central Intelligence Agency
COP28
The 28th Conference of the Parties (COP) to
the UN Framework Convention on Climate
Change
ECOWAS
Economic Community of West African States

ILO
International Labour Organization
International Convention against enforced
disappearance
International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance
LGBTI
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex

Escazú Agreement
Regional Agreement on Access to
Information, Public Participation and Justice
in Environmental Matters in Latin America
and the Caribbean

NATO
North Atlantic Treaty Organization

EU
European Union

NGO
Non-governmental organization

The State of the World’s Human Rights

NDC
Nationally determined contribution

vii

OAS
Organization of American States
OCHA
United Nations Office for the Co-ordination of
Humanitarian Affairs
OHCHR
Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights
OSCE
Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe
UK
United Kingdom
UN
United Nations
UN Convention against Torture
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment

UN Special Rapporteur on racism
UN Special Rapporteur on contemporary
forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
UN Special Rapporteur on torture
UN Special Rapporteur on torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment
UN Special Rapporteur on violence against
women
UN Special rapporteur on violence against
women, its causes and consequences
UNESCO
United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization
UNHCR, the UN refugee agency
Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees
UNICEF
United Nations Children’s Fund

UN Refugee Convention
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees

UPR
UN Universal Periodic Review

UN Special Rapporteur on climate change
UN Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of human rights in the context of
climate change

USA
United States of America
WHO
World Health Organization

UN Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial
executions
UN Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions
UN Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty
UN Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty
and human rights
UN Special Rapporteur on freedom of
expression
UN Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of the right to freedom of opinion
and expression

viii

The State of the World’s Human Rights

PREFACE
I never expected the state of human rights to lead me to reference the 1980s
sci-fi film Back to the Future. Yet here we are. A world spiralling through time,
hurtling backwards past the 1948 promise of universal human rights, even as
it spins ever faster forwards into a future overtaken by Big Tech and
unregulated generative artificial intelligence (AI).

“AUTHORITARIAN” PRACTICES ON THE RISE
In 2023, V-Dem, the political science research centre, found the number of
people living in democracies (broadly defined as countries providing rule of
law, constraints on the executive by the legislature and the judiciary, and
respect for civil liberties) had regressed to 1985 levels: to levels before the
Berlin Wall fell, before Nelson Mandela was released from prison, before the
Cold War ended in the hope that a new era for humanity was about to unfold.
That new era was all too brief and today is as good as gone. Evidence of its
passing grew in 2023. “Authoritarian” practices and ideas permeated many
governments and societies. North to south, east to west, authoritarian policies
ate away at freedoms of expression and association, hit out at gender equality,
and eroded sexual and reproductive rights.
The underlying public narratives, based in hatred and rooted in fear,
encroached on civic space and demonized marginalized individuals and
groups, with refugees, migrants and racialized groups bearing the brunt.
The backlash against women’s rights and gender equality intensified in
2023, with many of the past 20 years’ gains under threat.
In Afghanistan, being a woman or a girl has been de facto criminalized. In
2023, the Taliban passed dozens of official decrees aimed at erasing women
from public life. Similarly in Iran, the authorities continued their brutal
suppression of “Woman, Life, Freedom” protests and issued hate-ridden
official statements calling the unveiling of women a “virus”, a “social illness”
and a “disorder”.
In the USA, 15 states implemented total bans on abortion, or bans with
extremely limited exceptions, bringing disproportionate impacts on Black and
other racialized people. In Poland, at least one woman died because the law
denied her the abortion services she needed. Uganda adopted a harsh antigay law, while social and political leaders in the US also promoted anti-trans
narratives, policies and regulations.
Although the world has never been wealthier, 2023 was, as the World Bank
called it, “the year of inequality”. In settings as diverse the UK, Hungary and
India, defenders of economic and social rights were among the activists most
widely targeted. Climate activists were branded “terrorists” for denouncing
governments expanding fossil fuel production and investment. Critics of
governments’ handlings of the economy in the Middle East, trade unions in
Asia-Pacific were silenced and arbitrarily detained, as were those combating
corruption in West Africa.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

ix

BACK TO PRE-1948?
However, in 2023, our metaphorical time machine also tossed us much
further back than 1985 : a descent into a hell whose gates had been bolted
closed in 1948. “Never again”, the world had declared in the aftermath of
global warfare with its some 55 million civilian deaths, when faced with the
abject horror of a Holocaust that saw the extermination of six million Jews and
millions of others.
Yet in 2023, the “never again” moral and legal lessons were torn into a
million pieces. Following the horrific crimes perpetrated by Hamas on 7
October 2023 – when over 1,000 people, mostly Israeli civilians, were killed,
thousands wounded, and some 245 people taken hostage or captive – Israel
instigated a campaign of retaliation that became a campaign of collective
punishment. It is a campaign of deliberate, indiscriminate bombings of
civilians and civilian infrastructure, of denial of humanitarian assistance and
an engineered famine.
By the end of 2023, 21,600 Palestinians, mostly civilians, had been killed in
the unrelenting bombardment of Gaza, with thousands more missing,
believed buried under the rubble. Much of Gaza’s civilian infrastructure has
been obliterated, while nearly 1.9 million Palestinians have been internally
displaced and deprived of access to adequate food, water, shelter, sanitation
and medical assistance.
To be a Palestinian in Gaza today is to be plunged to a far more violent and
destructive version of the 1948 “Nakba” or the “catastrophe”, when more
than 750,000 Palestinians were forcibly displaced
For millions the world over, Gaza now symbolizes utter moral failure by many
of the architects of the post-World War Two system; their failure to uphold the
absolute commitment to universality, our common humanity and to our
“never again” commitment. The principles enshrined in the UN Charter, the
Geneva Conventions, the Genocide Convention, and international human
rights law have been dishonoured. That’s clearest in the case of the Israeli
authorities. However, Israel is not alone. The USA too has played a leading
part, as have some of Europe’s leaders and the EU leadership. So too have
those who continue to send arms to Israel, all who failed to denounce Israel’s
relentless violations and those who rejected calls for a ceasefire.
Their conduct exemplifies the double standards that Amnesty International
has denounced over many years. Yet, powerful actors have now gone further,
demonstrating a willingness to put at risk the entirety of the 1948 rule-based
order, stripping down the founding principles of common humanity and
universality and thus stripping away our global capacity to prevent the very
worst.
It all comes hot on the heels of Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine, a
violation of the UN Charter and an undermining of the international rule of
law. Russia’s aggression has continued to manifest itself in deliberate attacks
against civilians, the killing of thousands, and as widespread destruction of
civilian infrastructure, including Ukraine’s grain storage and export facilities.
China too, another permanent member of the UN Security Council, has
acted against international law, by protecting the Myanmar military and its
unlawful air strikes, through its practices of arrest and torture, and by
shielding itself from international scrutiny for the crimes against humanity it
continues to commit, including against the Uighur minority.

x

The State of the World’s Human Rights

THE FUTURE WE DON’T WANT
In 2023, with the much earlier-than-expected launch of ChatGPT-4 and
other generative AI tools, we were also thrust faster into the future. If the techrelated abuses witnessed in 2023 are anything to go by, prospects for our
future are chilling indeed.
Tech is enabling pervasive erosions of rights: perpetuating racist policies,
enabling spreading misinformation and curtailing freedoms of expression. Big
Tech ignored or minimized those harms, even in armed conflicts contexts
such as in Ethiopia, Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territories, Myanmar
and Sudan. With the alarming rise in online incitement and other harmful
content against both Palestinian and Jewish communities, Europe and the
USA also saw marked increases in anti-Muslim and antisemitic hate crimes.
In 2023, States turned increasingly to facial recognition technologies to aid
policing of public protests, sporting events and of marginalized communities
at large – migrants and refugees in particular. Abusive technologies were
relied upon for migration governance and border enforcement, including
through border externalization technologies, data analysis software, biometrics
and algorithmic decision-making systems.
Despite years of evidence of the human rights violations it enables, spyware
remained largely unregulated. In 2023, Amnesty International uncovered use
of Pegasus spyware against journalists and civil society activists in Armenia,
the Dominican Republic, India and Serbia, while EU-based spyware was sold
to states the world over. In response, the European Parliament adopted a
resolution in November 2023, criticizing the lack of action to curb abuses by
the spyware industry.
However, with tech-outlaws and their rogue technologies left to freely roam
the digital Wild West, such human rights violations are likely to escalate in
2024, a landmark electoral year. It is a foreshadowing of a future that is
already upon us.

GLOBAL SOLIDARITY
Human rights regressions in 2023 did not go unseen. To the contrary.
People around the world have stood up to regression, demonstrating
unprecedented global solidarity.
The Israel-Hamas conflict sparked hundreds of protests worldwide, with
millions protesting civilian deaths, calling for the release of hostages,
demanding a cease fire.
The UN Secretary-General, heads of UN agencies, and humanitarian
organizations took unprecedented steps to denounce war crimes committed
in southern Israel and Gaza and to call on Israel to respect international law.
The late 2023 UN General Assembly resolutions calling for a ceasefire were
adopted with a huge majority while South Africa filed an application before the
International Court of Justice, alleging that Israel’s conduct in Gaza violated
the 1948 Genocide Convention and insisting on the centrality of the postWorld War Two international rule-based system.
2023 saw momentum build towards a global regime for fairer taxation, to
help prevent tax evasion and avoidance and mobilize resources for lowerincome countries. In November, against the wishes of the richer countries,
the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution tabled by the African Group

The State of the World’s Human Rights

xi

establishing an international committee to draft a UN tax convention by June
2025.
In 2023, there were many people who resisted and disrupted forces pushing
the world backwards to the conditions of 1985 and of pre-1948; people who
marched and protested against forces that would propel us all into a future
not of our design. They too have shaped 2023, against all odds.
I hope that in 2048 – or even 3048 – when diplomats and activists look back
at the past year, they will find that there were many, many good people
around the world who did all they could. Who stood up and spoke out. For the
sake of our common humanity.

Agnès Callamard, Secretary General

xii

The State of the World’s Human Rights

THE STATE OF
THE WORLD’S
HUMAN RIGHTS
GLOBAL ANALYSIS AND REGIONAL OVERVIEWS

GLOBAL ANALYSIS
Human rights abuses were widespread in 2023. States and armed groups frequently
perpetrated unlawful attacks and killings in an increasing number of armed conflicts.
Authorities across the world repressed dissent by imposing crackdowns on freedoms of
expression, association and peaceful assembly, using unlawful force against protesters,
arbitrarily arresting and detaining human rights defenders, political opponents and other
activists, and sometimes torturing and otherwise ill-treating them. Many states failed to
take measures to fulfil people’s rights to food, health, education and a healthy
environment, neglecting economic injustices and the climate crisis. Governments often
treated refugees and migrants in abusive and racist ways. Deep-rooted discrimination
against women, LGBTI people, Indigenous Peoples and racialized or religious communities
marginalized these people and put them at disproportionate risk of violence and economic
and social rights violations. Multinational corporate actors played roles in some of these
abuses. The regional overviews elaborate on these trends at a regional level.
This global analysis focuses on four issues that highlight some of these adverse trends at
a global level: the treatment of civilians as expendable in armed conflict; the growing
backlash against gender justice; the disproportionate impact of economic crises, climate
change and environmental degradation on the most marginalized communities; and the
threats of new and existing technologies, including generative artificial intelligence (AI).
They represent, from Amnesty International’s perspective, critical challenges for human
rights across the world in 2024 and beyond. States must take concerted action to tackle
them and prevent further conflicts and crises emerging or deepening.

TREATMENT OF CIVILIANS IN ARMED CONFLICT
States and armed groups have treated civilians as expendable in armed conflicts, some of
which are partly rooted in racial and ethnic discrimination. The current international system
has generally been unable to take immediate and effective action to protect them, hamstrung
at times by racist double standards and rivalries between powerful states.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW
The breaking and bending of international humanitarian law, also known as the laws of war,
has had devastating consequences for civilians. In many conflicts, government forces have
relied on long-range ground and air attacks using weapons with wide-area effects against
populated areas. This has contributed significantly to mass civilian casualties and extensive
destruction of homes and infrastructure.
Some parties to conflicts have acted as though respecting international humanitarian law
rules is optional. Russia’s aggression against Ukraine has been marked by persistent war
crimes; Russian forces have indiscriminately attacked populated areas and civilian energy and
grain export infrastructure, tortured or otherwise ill-treated prisoners of war and caused vast
environmental contamination through acts including the apparently deliberate destruction of
the Kakhovka dam. Myanmar’s military and associated militias have conducted targeted
attacks against civilians, as well as indiscriminate attacks, resulting in over 1,000 civilian
deaths in 2023. Yet the Russian and Myanmar governments have rarely responded to reports

14

The State of the World’s Human Rights

of glaring violations, let alone committed to investigating them. Both have received financial
and military support from China.
In Sudan, both the warring parties, the Sudan Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces,
have demonstrated little concern for international humanitarian law as they carry out targeted
attacks that have killed and injured civilians and launch explosive weapons from densely
populated neighbourhoods. Between the eruption of fighting in April 2023 and the end of the
year, more than 12,000 people had been killed, over 5.8 million others had been internally
displaced and about 1.4 million had fled the country as refugees.
The Israeli authorities have made particular efforts to frame the attacks that they have carried
out on Gaza as complying with international humanitarian law. In reality, they have made a
mockery of some of its core norms. They have disregarded the principles of distinction and
proportionality with their acceptance of enormous civilian casualties and massive destruction
of civilian objects. By the end of 2023, their relentless bombardment and ground offensive had
killed, according to Gaza’s health ministry, 21,600 Palestinians, a third of whom were children.
Evidence of war crimes mounted as Israeli forces bombed crowded refugee camps and
residential buildings, repeatedly wiping out entire families and destroying hospitals, UN-run
schools, bakeries and other crucial infrastructure. They framed their evacuation orders of
northern Gaza as effective warnings and precautions but, in practice, forcibly displaced nearly
1.9 million Palestinians (83% of the total population of Gaza of 2.3 million) from their homes
and deliberately denied them humanitarian aid as part of the ongoing illegal blockade of Gaza.
These and other factors, including the increase in racist and dehumanizing rhetoric against
Palestinians by some Israeli government officials, were warning signs of genocide.
Meanwhile, Hamas and other Palestinian armed groups have justified the attack they
undertook on 7 October 2023, prior to Israel’s bombardment and ground offensive, as
resistance to Israel’s long-standing military occupation of Gaza and the West Bank. However,
the deliberate killing of hundreds of civilians in Israel, hostage-taking, and the firing of
indiscriminate rockets into Israel, among other crimes, flouted international humanitarian law
and amounted to war crimes.
Despite the staggering levels of civilian bloodshed, destruction and suffering in Gaza, the
USA and many European states publicly backed Israel’s approach. Some states, particularly
the USA, continued to arm Israel with weapons used in flagrant violations of human rights.
Given their well-founded protestations about war crimes by Russia and Hamas, those states
have exhibited gross double standards, undermining respect for international humanitarian law
and the protection of civilians. South Africa brought a case against Israel to the International
Court of Justice regarding breaches of the 1948 Genocide Convention in Gaza.
Government forces and armed groups similarly disregarded international humanitarian law in
armed conflicts in Afghanistan, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), Ethiopia, Libya, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Somalia, South
Sudan, Syria and Yemen in 2023. Civilians bore the brunt of indiscriminate and other unlawful
attacks, some of which constituted war crimes.
Gender-based violence has been a key feature of some of these conflicts. In a broader
context of sexual violence by the Eritrean Defence Forces, soldiers abducted at least 15
women and held them for nearly three months at a military camp in Ethiopia’s Tigray region,
raping them repeatedly. In the DRC, over 38,000 sexual violence cases were reported in NordKivu province alone during the first quarter of 2023.
Governments have clamped down at home on voices criticizing military actions and their
impact on civilians. Russia raised war-time censorship to new heights in 2023. Human rights
defenders, media and political activists working in conflict and post-conflict settings have been
attacked. Women human rights defenders have faced particular challenges.1

The State of the World’s Human Rights

15

RACIAL AND ETHNIC DISCRIMINATION
Racism lies at the heart of some of these armed conflicts and the responses to them.
The deep roots of the conflict in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territories lie partly in an
extreme form of racial discrimination – Israel’s ongoing system of apartheid against
Palestinians – by which Israel oppresses and dominates Palestinians through territorial
fragmentation, segregation and control, dispossession of land and property, and denial of
economic and social rights. “Othering” on ethnic lines is a feature of armed conflicts in
countries including Ethiopia, Myanmar and Sudan.
Racial discrimination has also manifested itself in responses to these conflicts. Discriminatory
double standards have not only been evident in the rhetoric and policies of the USA and many
European states towards the conflict in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territories, but also
towards its repercussions. Many governments have imposed unlawful restrictions on protests
in solidarity with Palestinians. Governments in Austria, France, Germany, Hungary, Poland and
Switzerland pre-emptively banned such protests in 2023, citing vague risks to public order or
national security and, in some cases, racist stereotypes. Media and politicians in the USA,
Western Europe and elsewhere have frequently used rhetoric that has dehumanized
Palestinians, spread racist discourses and conflated Muslims with terrorists.
In the same context, antisemitic and anti-Muslim hate crimes have increased in Europe and
the USA. There has also been an alarming rise in incitement and other harmful content posted
online against both Palestinian and Jewish communities more widely. Content posted by
Palestinians and advocates of Palestinian rights have reportedly been subjected to potentially
discriminatory content moderation by different social media platforms.2
Meanwhile, research on Ethiopia released in October 2023 demonstrated how Meta’s failure
to curb incitement on its Facebook platform contributed to killings and other serious human
rights abuses against members of the Tigrayan community.3
Racism has also been apparent in the treatment of those fleeing conflicts and other crises.
The policies of migration deterrence and externalization that the European Union, other
European states and the USA have adopted or maintained have forced people fleeing conflicts,
as well as other crises, into dangerous journeys. This has contrasted with their generally
positive treatment of Ukrainians seeking safety. In a positive development, Denmark, Finland
and Sweden took steps in May 2023 to grant recognition of refugee status as self-evident to
Afghan women and girls. However, in general, European countries have failed to provide
sufficient safe and regular pathways to protect Afghans and other people fleeing conflicts and
serious human rights violations.

INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM
Multilateral institutions have often been unable or unwilling to pressure parties to armed
conflicts to comply with international humanitarian law. While strained resources have been a
factor, many actors within these institutions have failed to demonstrate courage or consistently
apply their own principles. At worst, their members have displayed cynical and selfish
gamesmanship.
The UN Security Council has been unable to take effective action on major conflicts.
Predictably the USA weaponized its veto power to repeatedly prevent the Council from calling
for a ceasefire in Gaza.4 However, its paralysis has extended to issues on which there used to
be common ground. In July 2023, it failed to reauthorize the cross-border mechanism for the
delivery of humanitarian aid into Syria. Its Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict was
unable to reach a consensus on grave violations against children in Afghanistan, Myanmar,
Somalia and Syria, despite negotiations that continued for more than a year and in some
instances, for two or more years.

16

The State of the World’s Human Rights

The UN Human Rights Council has had an inconsistent record on tackling the consequences
of armed conflict. In 2023, it established a human rights monitoring mechanism on Sudan and
extended human rights reporting on Russia. However, it failed to extend crucial mandates.
These included the International Commission of Human Rights Experts on Ethiopia, despite
the conflict there having led to up to 600,000 civilian deaths and the commission’s warnings of
an “acute risk of further atrocities”. They also included the Fact-Finding Mission on Libya,
despite its conclusion that gross violations in the country have continued unabated with
impunity. Some states actively opposed the extension of these crucial mandates and states
that had previously supported their establishment abandoned this support in the face of
resistance.
There were at least signs that the UN was willing to address the dire threats posed by the
unregulated development of autonomous weapon systems, which threaten to leave decisionmaking on life and death to AI-driven algorithms. The UN General Assembly adopted a widely
supported resolution in December 2023 stressing the urgent need to address this issue. The
UN Secretary-General and the International Committee of the Red Cross have called for states
to conclude a legally binding treaty on autonomous weapon systems by 2026.
Accountability for crimes under international law during armed conflicts has generally
remained elusive and the Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC) has
increasingly shown double standards and selectivity in the treatment of situations under its
scrutiny. The Office of the Prosecutor closed its investigations in Kenya and Uganda and failed
to open a previously announced investigation in Nigeria. However, ICC investigations have
continued in a number of situations on which Amnesty International has documented crimes
under international law. Notably, an ICC arrest warrant was issued against Russian President
Vladimir Putin and Children’s Rights Commissioner Maria Lvova-Belova for alleged war crimes,
with an incumbent obligation on all ICC member states to arrest and surrender them, as
confirmed by a high court in South Africa. The ICC Prosecutor belatedly issued statements
confirming that the ICC’s ongoing investigation in the situation in Palestine would cover acts
committed in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territories on and after 7 October.
In addition, the adoption in May 2023 of the Ljubljana-The Hague Convention on
International Cooperation in the Investigation and Prosecution of the Crime of Genocide,
Crimes Against Humanity, War Crimes and other International Crimes (Mutual Legal Assistance
Convention) will open opportunities for victims of crimes under international law to pursue
justice through national courts.5
All UN member states should take steps to reform the UN Security Council so that
permanent members cannot use their veto power unchecked. They should sign and ratify
without reservations the Mutual Legal Assistance Convention. They should address the root
causes of conflicts, including racial and ethnic discrimination, and ensure the respect of
international humanitarian law in armed conflicts, including the protection of civilians.
They should strengthen UN institutions that play a preventative role, including the UN
Human Rights Council, the Special Procedures system, and bodies that investigate, report,
and preserve evidence of crimes under international law.

BACKLASH AGAINST GENDER JUSTICE
Despite progress in some countries, the backlash against the rights of women, girls and LGBTI
people has intensified. Many governments have undermined sexual and reproductive rights
and LGBTI rights and failed to tackle gender-based violence.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

17

DISCRIMINATION AND SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In recent years, women’s rights defenders and civil society organizations have advanced
respect for women’s rights and sexual and reproductive rights. However, those gains are being
undermined. UN Women has warned that gender disparities are worsening.
Some governments have reinforced discrimination against women and girls. In Afghanistan,
the authorities have banned women and girls from education beyond primary schools, working
with UN offices and NGOs, and employment in most public offices. In Iran, the authorities
have intensified their crackdown to enforce veiling. Women in both countries have faced brutal
state reprisals for exercising or demanding their rights. In France in 2023, the authorities
increased their restrictions on clothing deemed to be religious wear in schools and sport,
discriminating against Muslim women and girls.
Progress was made in a few countries on sexual and reproductive rights in 2023. In
Honduras, the government ended 14 years of prohibition on the use and sale of the
emergency contraceptive pill, although abortion remained banned. In Mexico, the Supreme
Court declared the criminalization of abortion unconstitutional. In Finland and Spain access to
abortion was facilitated.
However, in other countries, authorities have undermined sexual and reproductive rights,
including access to abortion. In the USA, the implementation by 15 states of total bans on
abortion or bans with extremely limited exceptions has disproportionately affected Black and
other racialized people. In Poland at least one woman died in 2023 as a consequence of being
denied abortion services. Social media platforms like Facebook, Instagram, and TikTok have
suppressed essential reproductive rights information following the 2022 US Supreme Court
decision that ended federal protections for the right to abortion. Those defending abortion
rights, including activists and healthcare workers, have been exposed to stigmatization,
physical and verbal attacks, intimidation and threats, as well as being criminalized through
unjust prosecutions, investigations and arrests.6

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
The struggle of women’s rights defenders has led in recent years to the welcome introduction
of some measures to prevent violence against women and girls. Nevertheless, violence against
women and girls has continued at an alarming level.
Legal protections to prevent and combat gender-based violence, including sexual and
domestic violence, were strengthened in 2023 in countries including Japan, North Macedonia,
Switzerland and Uzbekistan. However, authorities across the world have systematically failed to
address entrenched gender-based violence and the impunity its perpetrators often enjoy, as
well as neglecting the long-term needs of survivors. In Mexico, an average of nine women were
murdered each day in 2023. In countries including Algeria and Tunisia, women were
subjected to “honour killings”. The devastating effects of harmful practices were exemplified
by the deaths in 2023 of a 16-year-old who ended her life to escape a forced marriage in Niger
and of a two-year-old who was subjected to female genital mutilation in Sierra Leone.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Limited progress has been made to protect the rights of LGBTI people in a few countries, but
attacks on LGBTI rights have intensified in many others.
There were positive changes to law or policy in several countries in 2023. In Latvia, the
authorities recognized civil partnerships. In Taiwan, the authorities recognized the right of most
transnational same-sex couples to marry. Namibia’s supreme court ruled that spouses of
Namibian citizens could regularize their immigration status based on same-sex marriages
concluded outside the country. In Finland, Germany and Spain, the authorities facilitated
gender self-determination.

18

The State of the World’s Human Rights

However, 62 countries across the world have laws that criminalize same-sex sexual conduct,
many of which trace their origins back to colonialism.7 In 2023 there was a new wave of legal
actions or proposals to diminish LGBTI rights. A new law in Uganda introduced the death
penalty for the offence of “aggravated homosexuality”. In Ghana, parliament approved an
“anti-gay” bill. Russia adopted new transphobic legislation, Bulgaria ended legal gender
recognition for transgender people and the UK blocked the Scottish Gender Recognition
Reform Act. In India, the Supreme Court refused to grant legal recognition to same-sex
marriage.
There have been arrests and prosecutions of LGBTI people in many regions and restrictions
on organizations defending LGBTI rights. In 2023, scores were arrested and, in some cases,
even imprisoned under provisions that criminalize consensual same-sex sexual relations in
countries including Burundi, Egypt, Libya and Tunisia or for organizing gay weddings or parties
in Nigeria. In China, a prominent LGBTI organization was forced to close in the face of the
government’s ongoing anti-LGBTI campaign. Russia effectively outlawed any public LGBTI
rights-related activity by labelling as “extremist” an undefined “international LGBT movement”.
Violent crimes against LGBTI people have persisted and remained unpunished in many
regions. In Guatemala, where same-sex marriage remained illegal, at least 34 people were
killed because of their sexual orientation or gender identity. In Lebanon, authorities incited
violence against LGBTI people. In Iraq, authorities ordered media to replace the term
“homosexuality” with “sexual deviance”.
All governments should support gender justice and allied movements to tackle
discrimination against women and reinforce sexual and reproductive rights. They should
prioritize programmes to tackle gender-based violence and meet the longer-term needs of
survivors. They should advocate the repeal of laws and policies that discriminate against
LGBTI people.

IMPACT OF ECONOMIC CRISES AND CLIMATE CHANGE
Economic crises, climate change and environmental degradation have disproportionately
affected marginalized communities. Human rights defenders campaigning for the rights of
these communities have also been targeted as part of the wider repression of dissent.

ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL RIGHTS
The combination of conflict, climate change and the aftermath of the Covid-19 pandemic have
fuelled a range of economic crises. In a context where 4.1 billion people are not covered by
any social protection mechanism other than healthcare, these crises have had a deep human
rights impact, including high levels of food and fuel insecurity. They also seriously threaten the
fulfilment of the Sustainable Development Goals, which reached their midpoint in 2023. A
report by the UN Secretary-General in April 2023 revealed that “of around 140 targets with
data, only about 12% are on track”. As a result, on current trends 575 million people will be
living in extreme poverty in 2030 despite a goal to eradicate it completely.
Economic shocks have deepened national indebtedness in countries already facing debt
crises. According to a World Bank report of December 2023, about 60% of the world’s lowincome countries were either in or at high risk of debt distress. Many more were spending vast
sums of money, which they needed to fulfil human rights, on growing debt repayments.
Countries in severe debt distress have included Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Pakistan, Sri
Lanka, Tunisia, Ukraine and Zambia.
While the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organization has reported some reductions in global
food prices compared to the peak in 2022, prices have remained very high compared to the
period before Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 and in many markets

The State of the World’s Human Rights

19

have continued to rise. At different points in 2023, it was estimated that 78% of Sierra Leone’s
population were food insecure, 46% of South Sudan’s population were experiencing high
levels of food insecurity and 5 million people in Somalia were experiencing a food crisis. By
mid-December, 93% of people in Gaza were starving, according to the WHO, making them
vulnerable to death from otherwise curable diseases, with pregnant and breastfeeding women
at particular risk.
Some countries are taking steps to change global tax and other forms of economic
governance in order to better support economic and social rights realization. As part of this,
there has been progress towards establishing a global regime for fairer taxation that could help
mobilize resources for lower-income countries. The UN General Assembly passed a resolution
calling for a two-step process to negotiate a UN Framework Convention on Effective and
Inclusive International Tax Cooperation. It was proposed by Nigeria and backed
overwhelmingly, despite opposition from a significant number of higher-income states
including EU states, Japan, the UK and the USA.8

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Extreme weather events and slow onset crises made more likely and more intense by climate
change have affected countries at all levels of income, but disproportionately affected lowerincome ones. Governments and corporate actors have failed to tackle these adequately or to
prevent acute environmental degradation.
Governments, especially those historic and high emitting countries facing heightened
obligations under the legal principle of common but differentiated responsibility, have done far
too little to phase out fossil fuels and other drivers of climate change. Many have continued to
expand fossil fuel infrastructure, including with public funding.
The choice of the United Arab Emirates as the host of the last climate change conference,
COP28, proved controversial not least because the state-owned Abu Dhabi National Oil
Company, headed by the COP28 president, had announced plans to aggressively expand its
fossil fuel production. The COP28 agreement to “transition away” from fossil fuels for energy
was the first time that fossil fuels had been mentioned in a COP decision. However, it fell far
short of what was needed, leaving loopholes that allow fossil fuel producers and states to
continue with business as usual.9 Meanwhile, the total of USD 700 million pledged at COP28
to the Loss and Damage Fund, which is intended to assist communities in lower-income
countries who are suffering from disastrous weather events and other harms caused by global
warming, was barely enough to get it up and running.10
In more positive developments, several national and regional courts, including courts in
Cyprus and Ireland and the European Court of Human Rights, have recognized the right of
groups and individuals to file claims that governments have taken insufficient action to tackle
climate change or environmental degradation. These cases have the potential to hold
governments and fossil fuel companies to account for specific harm and to lay the groundwork
for further climate change litigation. Meanwhile, in March 2023, the UN General Assembly
backed Vanuatu and other Pacific Island states by asking the International Court of Justice to
provide an authoritative opinion on states’ obligations and responsibilities surrounding climate
change.11

DISPROPORTIONATE IMPACT ON MARGINALIZED PEOPLE
Racialized groups, including Indigenous Peoples and others experiencing intersecting
discrimination, have suffered disproportionately from the human rights harms associated with
economic crises, climate change and environmental degradation.
This disproportionate harm is attributable to several factors, including the cumulative impact
of present and past structural and direct discrimination. Consequently, marginalized

20

The State of the World’s Human Rights

communities in countries throughout the world have sometimes been unable to afford or
access medication and other essentials, including drinking water, sufficient food and power.
The high death toll among ethnic Rohingya from Cyclone Mocha, which hit Myanmar in May
2023, was largely attributable to the appalling conditions in which they have lived since being
forcibly displaced in 2012. The health of those living in poverty and informal sector workers
has been particularly damaged by the searing climate change-induced heatwaves in Pakistan.
Indigenous Peoples and other marginalized groups have been exceptionally impacted by
environmental degradation associated with large-scale extractive projects in regions including
the Americas and Asia.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders campaigning for the rights of those adversely affected by economic
crises, climate change and environmental degradation continue to be targeted by governments
and non-state actors.
Trade unions campaigning to protect workers facing the effect of economic crises and those
criticizing their government’s handling of economic crises have been targeted in countries from
Egypt to South Korea. In West and Central Africa, human rights defenders combating
corruption, a significant drain on resources, have been threatened, imprisoned or killed.12
They are among large numbers of human rights defenders who have been persecuted,
intimidated or even killed within wider patterns of repression of dissent. Three people from the
Guapinol community in Honduras were killed in 2023. They had been campaigning against a
mining company to protect the river on which their subsistence depends. Human rights
defenders have also been among those affected by the new laws or regulations restricting the
rights to freedom of expression or association that came into force in 2023 in countries
including Bangladesh, China, Cuba, Hungary, India, Jordan, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Singapore and the UK.
Indigenous Peoples, climate justice activists and environmental human rights defenders have
faced mass arrests and prosecution when engaging in peaceful acts of civil disobedience.
When protesting, they have, like many other activists, been criminalized or been met with
excessive or unnecessary use of force. The deployment of kinetic impact projectiles and other
types of projectiles against protesters has led to thousands of injuries across the world,
including permanent disabilities and scores of deaths.13 The continued militarization of the
police exacerbates this risk. Major producers of less lethal weapons have irresponsibly
supplied them to security forces known for using them unlawfully.14 It is important then that
momentum for a legally binding treaty to control the trade in law enforcement equipment has
been growing. In 2023 the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, the UN Special
Rapporteur on freedom of peaceful assembly and of association and the UN Special
Rapporteur on torture all expressed their support for a Torture-Free Trade Treaty.
Governments and international financial institutions should implement debt relief,
including debt cancellation for countries that are unable to meet their human rights
obligations due to high debt repayments. They should invest in universal social protection
programmes that fulfil the right to social security for all and work together to establish a
proposed Global Fund for Social Protection to support lower-income countries.15
Governments should cooperate to establish a UN tax convention. They should commit to a
full, rapid and equitable fossil fuel phase-out as part of a wider energy transition package.
They should work towards a UN Torture-Free Trade Treaty. They must guarantee the
protection of human rights defenders.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

21

THREATS OF NEW AND EXISTING TECHNOLOGIES
The emergence of generative AI tools has made headlines in recent months, highlighting the
threats that they and existing technologies pose to human rights, particularly the rights of those
most marginalized in society. States have not taken sufficient steps to rein in the global trade in
spyware or the surveillance-based business model of the biggest technology companies,
known as Big Tech.

RISKS OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
The launch in 2023 of ChatGPT-4, a tool which can synthesize and generate text, has drawn
attention to how generative AI will transform people’s working lives, their access to government
services and their experience of internet platforms more generally. Like any new technology,
generative AI may create opportunities but, without adequate and effective regulation, may
also exacerbate risks to human rights in areas such as access to welfare, education and
employment, labour rights, privacy and online safety. Risks include the reinforcement of racial
and other inequalities, increased surveillance and the amplification of hate content online.16
Existing AI systems, among other technologies, have already amplified inequality and hurt
marginalized communities in areas such as access to state services, policing, security and
migration.17 In Serbia, the new semi-automated social welfare system, funded by the World
Bank, resulted in possibly thousands of people losing access to vital social assistance and
disproportionally affected Roma and people with disabilities. Israel’s use of facial recognition
technology in the Occupied Palestinian Territories has reinforced restrictions on freedom of
movement and helped maintain the system of apartheid. The New York Police Department
revealed in 2023 how it used the technology to subject Black Lives Matter protests in the city
to surveillance, but pressure mounted on the New York City Council to ban it. Meanwhile,
venture capital firms investing in new technologies have often failed in their responsibility to
respect human rights.18

GLOBAL SPYWARE TRADE
States have failed to rein in the global trade in spyware. Research by Amnesty International in
2023 helped uncover the use of Pegasus spyware against journalists and civil society in
Armenia, the Dominican Republic, India and Serbia. A major investigation on the Predator
Files by the European Investigative Collaborations, in partnership with Amnesty International,
uncovered how “EU-based and regulated” spyware has been freely sold to states all over the
world.19 In the aftermath of these revelations, the European Parliament adopted a resolution in
November 2023 criticizing the lack of action to curb abuses by the spyware industry. This built
on other signs that some policymakers are beginning to act, including a statement from 11
states in March 2023 that recognized the threats spyware presents to human rights.

ABUSES BY BIG TECH
The harms of Big Tech’s surveillance-based business model were laid bare again in 2023, not
only in the context of armed conflict, but also in how they undermine the rights of children and
other young people. TikTok’s content recommender system and invasive data collection
practices pose a danger to young users of the platform by amplifying depressive and suicidal
content that carry the risk of worsening existing mental health challenges.20 There has also
been an alarming surge in incitement against LGBTI people on X (formerly Twitter).21 The
proliferation of political mis- and disinformation is likely to increase, an especially grave risk
given the large number of elections taking place in 2024. Repressive political forces in many
parts of the world have weaponized social media to attack minorities and pit communities
against one another in an effort to bolster their chances of electoral success. Such efforts are

22

The State of the World’s Human Rights

facilitated and exacerbated by the social media algorithms and business models of Big Tech,
which prioritize “engagement” and profits at all costs. The risks are aggravated by the
emergence of generative AI tools.
Some regulators, on the one hand, and victims seeking remedies, on the other, are making
efforts to prevent further abuses. In July 2023, the Court of Justice of the EU delivered a major
ruling against the surveillance-based business model underpinning Meta, the company that
owns Facebook and Instagram. Shortly afterwards, the Norwegian authorities ordered Meta to
stop showing personalized advertisements based on the online activity and estimated location
of users in Norway. In the EU, civil society focused on pushing for robust implementation of
the landmark Digital Services Act of 2022, the world’s first comprehensive regulation governing
Big Tech and promising respect for human rights. However, there have been missed
opportunities to address the risks of AI technologies. The EU reached an agreement on the EU
Artificial Intelligence Act in 2023, but the final text did not go far enough to prevent harm and
may even contribute to the expansion and legitimization of the surveillance activities of police
and migration authorities.
Governments should immediately ban highly invasive spyware and facial recognition
technology. They should take robust legislative and regulatory steps to address the risks and
harms caused by AI technologies. They should rein in Big Tech, particularly by addressing
the harms of its surveillance-based business model.
1. “Challenges faced by women human rights defenders working in conflict, post-conflict or crisis-affected settings”, 5 June
2. “Global: Social media companies must step up crisis response on Israel-Palestine as online hate and censorship proliferate”, 27 October
3. “Ethiopia: Meta’s failures contributed to abuses against Tigrayan community during conflict in northern Ethiopia”, 31 October
4. “Israel/OPT: US veto of ceasefire resolution displays callous disregard for civilian suffering in face of staggering death toll”, 8 December
5. “International Justice Day: Harnessing the Rome Statute and strengthening the system of international justice”, 17 July
6. An Unstoppable Movement: A Global Call to Recognize and Protect Those Who Defend the Right to Abortion, 24 November
7. “Colonialism and sexual orientation and gender identity: Submission to the Independent Expert on protection against violence and discrimination
based on sexual orientation and gender identity”, 15 June
8. “Global: Vote in favour of international cooperation on tax helps advance human rights”, 22 November
9. “Global: COP28 agreement to move away from fossil fuels sets precedent but falls short of safeguarding human rights”, 13 December
10. “Global: Initial pledges at COP28 to finance the Loss & Damage Fund fall far short of what is needed”, 30 November
11. “Global: UN backs Pacific Island states by asking the International Court to advance climate justice”, 29 March
12. Anti-Corruption Fight in Peril: Crackdown on Anti-Corruption Human Rights Defenders in West and Central Africa, 11 July
13. ‘My Eye Exploded’: The Global Abuse of Kinetic Impact Projectiles, 14 March
14. “The repression trade”, 11 October
15. Rising Prices, Growing Protests: The Case for Universal Social Protection, 10 May; Actions Speak Louder than Words: The World Bank Must Promote
Universal Social Protection, 10 October
16. “Global: Companies must act now to ensure responsible development of artificial intelligence”, 14 June
17. Digitally Divided: Technology, Inequality, and Human Rights, 2 October
18. Silicon Shadows: Venture Capital, Human Rights, and the Lack of Due Diligence, 13 December
19. The Predator Files: Caught in the Net, 9 October
20. ‘I feel exposed’: Caught in TikTok’s surveillance web, 7 November; Driven into Darkness: How TikTok’s ‘For You’ Feed Encourages Self-Harm and
Suicidal Ideation, 7 November
21. “Hateful and abusive speech towards LGBTQ+ community surging on Twitter surging under Elon Musk”, 9 February

The State of the World’s Human Rights

23

AFRICA REGIONAL OVERVIEW
Renewed violence in Sudan illustrated the immense suffering of civilians caught up in
armed conflicts across the region, and the utter disregard by parties to conflicts for
international humanitarian law. Reports of mass civilian casualties were frequent and
shocking, particularly given the scale of targeted and indiscriminate attacks. Sexual
violence remained a feature of armed conflict.
Criticizing governments remained dangerous in many African countries. Brutal
crackdowns against those who protested government excesses, failures, or allegations of
corruption, were pervasive and particularly targeted journalists, human rights defenders,
activists and opposition leaders and members. The killings of prominent human rights
defender Thulani Maseko in Eswatini and journalist Martinez Zogo in Cameroon, and the
death in suspicious circumstances of Rwandese investigative journalist John Williams
Ntwali, in one week in January, was a dark moment for the human rights movement.
Combined factors, including inflation, corruption, climate change and conflict, created
unbearable living conditions. Millions of people lacked access to basic economic and social
rights. Many countries were disproportionately affected by high food price inflation, and
food insecurity reached staggering levels.
Incessant armed conflicts and extreme weather events displaced millions of people from
their homes, and yet authorities in several countries flouted their obligations to provide
protection to refugees and asylum seekers.
Gender-based discrimination and violence against women and girls remained entrenched,
while homophobic attacks and clampdowns on LGBTI peoples’ rights escalated across the
region.
African governments remained largely indifferent to calls for them to tackle impunity,
thereby allowing it to flourish, and fuelling the cycle of violations and abuses, and the
disregard for the rule of law. Many governments undermined justice and accountability
initiatives or openly frustrated international scrutiny of their human rights records.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
Armed conflicts continued to have a devastating effect on civilians in Burkina Faso, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic (CAR), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), Mali,
Nigeria, Somalia, Sudan and elsewhere. When they were not deliberately targeted, including in
ethnically motivated attacks, civilians bore the brunt of indiscriminate attacks, which
sometimes involved airstrikes, rockets, mortars and other explosive weapons with wide-area
effects. Some of these attacks constituted war crimes.
In Sudan, more than 12,000 people were killed when fighting erupted between the Sudan
Armed Forces (SAF) and the Rapid Support Forces (RSF). Targeted attacks in many parts of
the country, including the capital, Khartoum, but particularly in West Darfur, killed and injured
civilians, as did explosive weapons launched by the SAF and RSF from densely populated
neighbourhoods.
In Burkina Faso, members of the Ansaroul Islam armed group killed at least 60 civilians in
the town of Partiaga in February; six months later they killed 22 people in Nohao. Government
forces targeted civilians. In one case, soldiers, accompanied by Volunteers for the Defence of
the Homeland, killed at least 147 civilians in the village of Karma. In the DRC, armed groups
killed at least 4,000 people and wounded thousands. In Nord-Kivu province, fighters of the

24

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Allied Democratic Forces armed group killed some 23 people with machetes. In Ituri province,
at least 46 people, half of them children, were shot and hacked to death overnight by fighters
of the Cooperative for the Development of the Congo armed group. In Mali, attacks by Islamic
State in the Sahel on the villages of Gaina and Boyna, Gao region, left 17 people dead. Two
months later, an attack by members of the Group for the Support of Islam and Muslims on the
villages of Bodio and Yarou in the Bandiagara region, resulted in 37 civilian deaths.
An airstrike by the Nigerian air force killed 21 civilians in Niger state, while a new conflict
between Somaliland security forces and armed fighters resulted in 36 civilian deaths, in
Somalia, mainly due to the indiscriminate shelling of Las Anod town by Somaliland security
forces.
Parties to armed conflicts must protect civilians by ending targeted and indiscriminate
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure.

CONFLICT-RELATED SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED
VIOLENCE
Widespread conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence, including rape, gang rape,
abduction and sexual slavery continued, and many survivors had no access to necessary
medical and psycho-social support. Soldiers of the Eritrean Defence Forces held at least 15
women captive for nearly three months at a military camp in Ethiopia’s Tigray region, raping
them repeatedly. In Burkina Faso, alleged members of Ansaroul Islam abducted 66 women,
girls and newborn babies near the village of Liki in the Sahel region. They were freed four days
later at a checkpoint in Tougouri. Boko Harem fighters abducted over 40 women in Mafa local
government area in Borno state, Nigeria.
In CAR, the UN announced that it had collected evidence of rape, incriminating 11
Tanzanian peacekeepers. In the DRC, over 38,000 sexual violence cases were reported in
Nord-Kivu province alone during the first quarter of 2023. In Mali, the UN recorded 51
incidents of conflict-related sexual violence, during the same period, against women and girls.
In Sudan, scores of women and girls were subjected to sexual violence, including rape, by
members of warring sides, mainly RSF and allied militias. In one case, RSF members
abducted 24 women and girls, holding them in a hotel in Nyala for days in conditions
amounting to sexual slavery.
Parties to armed conflicts should issue clear orders to their members or forces,
prohibiting acts of sexual and gender-based violence; and governments should ensure that
survivors of such violence have full access to medical and pyscho-social healthcare.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
Across the region, protesters poured onto the streets to voice their concerns about a myriad of
issues, including the high cost of living, poor governance and human rights violations. In many
cases, security forces dispersed protests using excessive force; scores of protesters and
bystanders were killed and injured, including in Angola, Ethiopia, Kenya, Mali, Mozambique,
Senegal and Somalia. Police in Kenya killed at least 57 people during protests between March
and July. In Senegal, at least 29 people were killed in June when police and armed men in
civilian clothing fired live ammunition to disperse violent protests in the capital, Dakar, and
Ziguinchor.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

25

In other cases, protests were banned in advance, including in Chad, Guinea, Senegal and
Sierra Leone. Bans were primarily targeted at rallies and demonstrations called for by civil
society or opposition parties or leaders. In Chad, two demonstrations organized by opposition
parties were among those banned by the Ministry of Public Security, ostensibly because the
parties did not exist legally and had not met the conditions for authorization of a
demonstration. In Guinea, a blanket ban, imposed on all political gatherings since May 2022,
remained in place although several rallies supporting the head of state were allowed to
proceed.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Threats to the right to freedom of expression continued. Speaking out against government
policies, actions or inaction, or publicly sharing information deemed damaging to the
government carried the risk of arrest, arbitrary detention, or death. Thulani Maseko, a human
rights defender in Eswatini, was assassinated in his home. Journalist Martinez Zogo’s mutilated
body was found five days after he was abducted in the Yaoundé suburbs in Cameroon. He had
been reporting on the alleged corruption of people close to the government. John Williams
Ntwali, an investigative journalist who reported on human rights-related issues, died in
suspicious circumstances in Rwanda, one day after he told another journalist that he feared
for his safety.
In South Sudan, seven journalists were arbitrarily detained at the National Security Service
detention facility in the capital, Juba, in relation to a video circulated on social media, which
allegedly showed the president urinating on himself. They were held for various periods of up
to 10 weeks and released without charge; one of them appeared to have been tortured and
otherwise ill-treated.
In Somalia, a court sentenced Abdalle Ahmed Mumin, a journalist and secretary general of
the Somali Journalists Syndicate, to two months’ imprisonment for “disobeying government
orders”. Having already spent over two months in detention on remand, he was released but
re-arrested just over one week later and detained for another month. In Tanzania, at least 12
people were arrested between June and December for criticizing the Tanzania/UAE port
agreement, and released unconditionally after a few days.
Judicial harassment of critics was common. In Burundi, journalist Floriane Irangabiye was
sentenced to 10 years’ imprisonment for “undermining the integrity of the national territory”.
Her conviction, based on comments made on a radio show, was upheld on appeal. In Benin,
Virgile Ahouansè, news director of an online radio station, was given a 12-month suspended
prison sentence for “disseminating false information”. In 2022, he had broadcast an
investigation containing witness statements accusing the police of extrajudicial executions. In
Niger, Samira Ibrahim was convicted for “producing… data…to disturb public order”, after
she claimed on Facebook that Algeria did not recognize Niger’s military regime.
Several journalists, human rights defenders and activists, including in CAR, Chad, Mali,
Tanzania and Togo, were forced into exile. In Togo, Ferdinand Ayité and Isidore Kowonou of
L’Alternative newspaper were sentenced to three years in prison and a hefty fine after
publishing an article accusing two government members of corruption. They fled the country
to avoid serving their sentences. In CAR, a journalist who wrote about alleged corruption in the
National Assembly fled the country, following threats from an unidentified source. In Mali,
human rights defender Aminata Dicko was forced into exile after denouncing abuses by the
armed forces in a briefing to the UN Security Council, following which the gendarmerie
summoned her for questioning in connection to allegations of high treason and defamation.
In Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad, Niger, Togo and elsewhere, authorities suspended media
houses, newspaper outlets or news websites for various periods. Faced with social or political
upheavals, authorities in Ethiopia, Guinea, Mauritania and Senegal suspended or disrupted

26

The State of the World’s Human Rights

internet access. Nigeria’s National Broadcasting Commission imposed punitive fines on 25
stations over their coverage of the 2023 general elections for allegedly breaching the
broadcasting code. Other authorities went further, including in Benin where the Gazette du
Golfe press group was suspended indefinitely. In Burkina Faso, two foreign correspondents
were expelled from the country and in Niger, L’Évènement newspaper was closed for alleged
non-payment of taxes.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Severe and unwarranted restrictions on the right to freedom of association increased.
Opposition parties were targeted and their ability to organize and freely conduct their activities
was stifled. In Burundi, authorities suspended almost all activities of the main opposition party,
the National Congress for Liberty. Following the July coup in Niger, the military suspended all
activities by political parties indefinitely. In Uganda, campaign gatherings and other activities of
the National Unity Platform party were suspended. On a positive note, Tanzania’s president
lifted a 2016 ban on political parties organizing rallies and other political activities.
Authorities continued to weaponize laws to curtail human rights, including the right to
freedom of association. In Angola, the NGO bill that, according to NGOs, could limit the right to
freedom of association and give the executive excessive powers to interfere in their activities,
was approved by parliament.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS, AND TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Arbitrary arrests and detention remained widespread. Mass arrests and detention, in many
cases, were used during the dispersal by security forces of protests or during the enforcement
of states of emergency. In August, the Ethiopian government imposed a six-month nationwide
state of emergency, following armed clashes between the army and the Fano militia in the
Amhara region. It provided the pretext for the detention of hundreds of people who were
denied access to lawyers and courts. In Senegal, over 1,000 people were arrested and
detained mostly for participating in protests, or for their alleged connection to the opposition
party, PASTEF.
In other countries, including Botswana, Burundi, Niger and Zimbabwe, high-profile political
figures were arrested or arbitrarily detained. In Botswana, several leaders of the Botswana
Patriotic Front opposition party, and two journalists, were arrested and detained without charge
for up to two days. Following the coup in Niger, President Bazoum and his family were
detained in the presidential complex. Several other former government and ruling party
officials were detained without charge. In Zimbabwe, Jacob Ngarivhume, the leader of
opposition party Transform Zimbabwe was acquitted on appeal eight months after being
sentenced to 48 months’ imprisonment (12 suspended). He had been arrested in July 2020
for leading and organizing anti-corruption protests.
Arbitrary arrests and detention were also reported in the DRC, Equatorial Guinea, Mali and
elsewhere.
Torture and other ill-treatment in detention remained a grave concern. Suspicious deaths in
police custody were reported in several countries, including Equatorial Guinea, Lesotho,
Mauritania and Nigeria. In Mauritania, human rights defender Souvi Ould Jibril Ould Cheine
died after interrogation at a police station. An official autopsy concluded that his death was
due to strangulation, contradicting the authorities’ claim that he died of a heart attack. The
public prosecutor ordered the arrest of the commissioner and police officers involved. In
Nigeria, Faiz Abdullahi died in police custody in Kaduna state, after being tortured during
interrogation. A 17-year-old student, died in hospital following torture during interrogation by
police in Adamawa state.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

27

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS AND ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
In several countries, extrajudicial executions and other unlawful killings, and enforced
disappearances continued to be used as tools of repression. In Burkina Faso, public figures
were abducted or arrested and forcibly disappeared, including the national president of an
organization representing pastoralists’ interests. In Burundi, reports of enforced
disappearances, mostly of political opponents, continued; the National Intelligence Service and
members of the ruling party’s youth wing, the Imbonerakure, were the main alleged
perpetrators. In Eritrea, the fate and whereabouts of 11 members of the G-15, a group of 15
senior politicians who spoke publicly against the president in 2001, remained unknown along
with that of 16 journalists accused of being linked to the G-15.
Governments must end the harassment and intimidation of journalists, human rights
defenders, activists, and opposition members and leaders; immediately and unconditionally
release anyone who is arbitrarily detained; and ensure media freedom is respected,
including by allowing media outlets to operate independently.

ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL RIGHTS
RIGHT TO FOOD
Many African countries were among the world’s most affected by high food price inflation. The
number of food insecure people reached staggering proportions. The World Food Programme
estimated that as of February, 78% of Sierra Leone’s population was food insecure and 20% of
households were severely food insecure. In December, OCHA said that 5.83 million people
(46%) of South Sudan’s population were experiencing high levels of food insecurity. In
Namibia, acute food insecurity rose sharply, affecting 22% of the population.
Climate change and extreme weather events exacerbated the food crisis. In Madagascar,
food insecurity increased after two cyclones struck in January and February, destroying cash
crops and hindering humanitarian aid delivery to affected areas. In Somalia, an estimated 5
million people experienced food crisis; drought devastated the agriculture sector, which
provides up to 90% of its exports.
Armed conflicts compounded the situation. In Burkina Faso, armed groups besieged at least
46 towns and cities, cutting off access to essential supplies, blocking residents’ access to their
farmlands and sabotaging water infrastructure. International aid agencies suspended food aid
to Ethiopia’s Tigray region for six months following evidence of supplies being diverted,
allegedly by government agencies and the military. Over 4 million already food insecure people
were affected, and hundreds reportedly died as a result.
Governments took measures to combat inflation and ensure a stable food supply to the
domestic market. These included Sierra Leone’s adoption of a programme to increase
agricultural productivity and food self-sufficiency, and Côte d’Ivoire’s suspension of rice and
sugar exports. Meanwhile, the international response was insufficient. International funds
assigned to food security in Chad was USD 96.9 million as of September, USD 128.1 million
short of what was needed. In South Sudan, funding shortfalls for the UN’s humanitarian
project meant that emergency food assistance had to be prioritized for people experiencing the
highest levels of food insecurity.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
The right to education was denied or severely impeded in conflict-affected countries,
particularly in Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the DRC and Niger. In Burkina Faso, at least 6,549
schools were closed as of October, and only about 539 reopening during the year, affecting
over one million children. In Cameroon, at least 13 violent incidents against educational

28

The State of the World’s Human Rights

establishments were reported in the Northwest and Southwest regions, including the
abduction of children and teachers, between January and July, and at least 2,245 schools
were closed. In the DRC, the education of around 750,000 children was disrupted in two of
the most conflict-affected provinces in the east. Thousands of schools were attacked, forced to
close due to insecurity, or used as shelters for displaced people.
On a positive note, Zambia’s Free Education Programme for primary school age children
began in January under which an extra 4,500 teachers were recruited. In Tanzania, there was
an overall increase in enrolment and literacy rates, and a reduction in barriers to children’s
access to school. However, despite the lifting in 2022 of the ban on pregnant girls and
adolescent mothers attending mainstream schools, low retention rates continued.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Access to healthcare in many countries remained a challenge. The Ghana Health Service
revealed in February that 27 pregnant women in Bawku municipality died between 2021 and
2022 due to their inability to access medical services. In South Africa, a strike action in March
relating to wage disputes, hindered access to healthcare services and resulted in four deaths,
according to the health minister. Meanwhile, shigellosis, cholera, typhoid and other disease
epidemics were reported in Congo, South Sudan and elsewhere.

FORCED EVICTIONS
Governments continued to carry out forced evictions in the name of development projects. In
Benin, thousands of people who had been forcibly evicted in connection with tourism projects
along the coast, between the cities of Cotonou and Ouidah, complained about the lack of
adequate compensation. In the DRC’s Lualaba province, the expansion of industrial-scale
cobalt and copper mines, driven by the growing global demand for energy transition minerals,
fuelled forced evictions of thousands of people from their homes and farmland.
In Uganda’s Hoima district, security forces used violence to forcibly evict nearly 500 families
from their land to allow for the construction of the East African Crude Oil Pipeline. In Tanzania,
at least 67 Maasai Indigenous People were arrested, mainly in Endulen village, for refusing to
leave their ancestral lands under ongoing enforced relocation plans to establish a protected
wildlife area in the Ngorongoro Conservation Area.
Governments must take immediate action to address socio-economic hardships, ensuring
that resources are made available, in line with their minimum core obligations, to provide
their populations with economic and social rights.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLES’, REFUGEES’ AND
MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Nearly 7 million people were estimated to be internally displaced in the DRC, the highest
number in Africa. The country hosted 500,000 refugees from armed conflict and persecution
in other African countries. Between January and August, around 45,000 people fled the DRC
for neighbouring countries, including Uganda which hosted over 1.6 million refugees, the
largest refugee population in Africa.
Over 5.8 million people were internally displaced since April in Sudan, making it the scene of
the largest displacement crisis in the world in 2023. Over 4.5 million of them were displaced
between April – when the conflict began – and October, while about 1.4 million Sudanese and
other nationalities fled to neighbouring countries. However, some countries denied Sudanese
asylum seekers entry; the Egyptian authorities required all Sudanese nationals to obtain an

The State of the World’s Human Rights

29

entry visa issued by the Egyptian consular office in Sudan, and introduced the additional entry
requirement of security clearance for boys and men aged between 16 and 50.
In Niger, around 9,000 refugees and migrants who had been deported by the Algerian
authorities arrived at the border village of Assamaka between January and April. In Malawi,
police arrested hundreds of refugees from their homes and businesses in the capital,
relocating them to the Dzaleka refugee camp.
Governments must honour their obligations to provide protection to refugees, asylum
seekers and migrants, including by respecting the right to claim asylum and to nonrefoulement.

DISCRIMINATION
WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
The devastating effects of female genital mutilation were illustrated when a two-year-old girl
died after being subjected to the practice in Sierra Leone. Child, early and forced marriage
persisted in the region. Nearly 29% of women aged between 20 and 24 in Zambia had been
married before they were 18. The case of 16-year-old Nazira who ended her life to escape a
forced marriage shone a spotlight on the harm caused by early marriage in Niger.
There were several positive legislative developments. The DRC enacted a law criminalizing
gender-based intimidation and stigmatization. In Sierra Leone, a new law required that 30% of
seats in public office be held by women. In South Africa, a bill intended to establish a body to
oversee the implementation of a strategic plan on gender-based violence was released for
public comment.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Some countries took anti-gay legislative steps. In Uganda a new law introducing the death
penalty for the offence of “aggravated homosexuality” was followed by reports of increased
violence against LGBTI people. In Kenya, an MP proposed a bill that could further criminalize
consensual same-sex sexual relations. In Ghana, parliament approved an anti-gay bill. In
Eswatini, the government flouted a court ruling when it refused to register an LGBTI
organization.
The arrest and detention of LGBTI people was common. In Burundi, 24 people were arrested
in February in Gitega at a workshop on economic inclusion. They, and two others later added
to the case, were prosecuted on charges of “homosexuality” and “incitement to debauchery”.
Seven were found guilty in August and nine of those acquitted were not immediately released,
one of whom died in custody. In Nigeria, 69 men faced criminal trial for organizing a gay
wedding in Delta state while another group of 59 men and 17 women were arrested in Gombe
state for allegedly holding a “gay” birthday party.
Anti-gay rhetoric increased in Botswana, Cameroon, Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi and Tanzania.
In Botswana and Malawi, hundreds of protesters, backed by religious groups and government
officials, demonstrated against the decriminalization of consensual same-sex sexual relations.
In Cameroon, authorities threatened to suspend media outlets if they broadcast “programmes
promoting homosexual practices”. In Ethiopia, an on- and offline campaign against LGBTI
people was launched by social media influencers, religious leaders and popular artists. In
Tanzania, the education minister banned books that include LGBTI content from schools.
On a positive note, Namibia’s supreme court ruled that spouses of Namibian citizens could
regularize their immigration status based on same-sex marriages concluded outside the
country; and Kenya’s supreme court affirmed the right to freedom of association for LGBTI
people.

30

The State of the World’s Human Rights

PERSONS WITH ALBINISM
Crimes against persons with albinism, including reports of attempted abductions, physical
attacks and desecration of graves, increased in Malawi. In Angola, the National Action Plan for
the Protection and Promotion of the Human Rights of Persons with Albinism was adopted.
Governments must urgently combat all forms of gender-based discrimination and violence
against women and girls, including by addressing the root causes, and increasing efforts to
eliminate harmful practices. Governments must strengthen protections of LGBTI people’s
rights including through legislation, and by effectively investigating reports of abuse and
bringing suspected perpetrators to justice.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Several countries were affected by extreme weather events, the intensity and frequency of
which could be related to climate change. However, governments were ill-prepared to respond
to slow and rapid onset weather events across the region. In February and March, Cyclone
Freddy affected millions of people in Malawi and Mozambique, killing 679 and 453 people,
respectively. Floods claimed many lives in several other countries, including the DRC and
Rwanda. In September, the first Africa Climate Summit was held in Nairobi to establish a
united African position ahead of negotiations at the UN Climate Change Conference (COP28).
Governments must take immediate measures to protect against the risk and impacts of
the climate crisis and strengthen their preparedness for extreme weather events, including
by seeking international assistance and climate finance from developed countries to adopt
effective mitigation and adaptation policies, and to remediate the loss and damages
experienced by the most marginalized.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND REPARATION
Following the Ethiopian government’s cynical campaign to frustrate justice and accountability
initiatives, the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights prematurely terminated the
mandate of its Commission of Inquiry into the situation in the Tigray Region, without publishing
any findings. The government also targeted the UN International Commission of Human Rights
Experts on Ethiopia (ICHREE), resulting in the failure by member states at the UN Human
Rights Council to table a resolution to renew ICHREE’s mandate. Meanwhile, Burundi walked
out of its review session at the UN Human Rights Committee, objecting to the presence of a
human rights defender convicted in his absence on false accusations of participating in the
2015 coup attempt, while Tanzania prevented a UNESCO fact-finding delegation from visiting
Ngorongoro to investigate reports of violent forced evictions against the Maasai Indigenous
People.
Several countries introduced or considered introducing truth and reconciliation processes,
albeit at the expense of pursuing justice and accountability for victims of crimes under
international law and other serious human rights violations and abuses. The DRC’s government
adopted the Draft National Transitional Justice Policy, and the Ethiopian government started
consultations for the adoption of a similar policy.
In South Sudan, the Council of Ministers approved two draft bills to establish the Commission
for Truth, Reconciliation and Healing and the Compensation and Reparation Authority, which
were yet to be tabled for debate in parliament. However, it continued to block the
establishment of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan. Authorities in the Gambia agreed to
establish a hybrid court to prosecute suspected perpetrators of serious human rights violations
during Yahya Jammeh’s presidency.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

31

Several suspected perpetrators of crimes under international law were arrested. CAR’s
Special Criminal Court announced the arrests of four men accused of war crimes and/or
crimes against humanity. Steps were taken to bring two genocide suspects to account:
Fulgence Kayishema was re-arrested on a new arrest warrant that would allow his extradition
to the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals in Tanzania while Théoneste
Niyongira was deported from Malawi to Rwanda.
Governments must strengthen efforts to fight impunity by undertaking prompt, thorough,
independent, impartial, effective and transparent investigations into crimes under
international law and other serious human rights violations and abuses, bringing suspected
perpetrators to justice and ensuring victims’ access to an effective remedy.

32

The State of the World’s Human Rights

AMERICAS REGIONAL OVERVIEW
Civic space continued to shrink across the Americas, threatening the progress made in
recent decades in relation to human rights. Human rights defenders, particularly climate
justice activists and those fighting to protect their land and the environment, and
journalists were targets of harassment, criminalization, attacks and killings, thus, the
region continued to be one of the most dangerous places for these activities. Most
countries across the Americas lacked robust protection systems for human rights
defenders. Peaceful demonstrations were met with unlawful force by security forces.
Authorities persisted in violating people’s rights to life, liberty, fair trial and physical
integrity, and arbitrary detentions were widespread. Gender-based violence across the
region remained entrenched and authorities failed to address impunity for these crimes and
protect women, girls and other groups of people at risk of discrimination and violence.
Progress in recent years to expand access to safe abortion experienced a marked setback
across the region, even in countries where it had been decriminalized. LGBTI people
continued to experience widespread persecution, as well as obstacles to legal recognition.
Indigenous Peoples continued to be disproportionately affected by human rights violations
and faced discrimination. In a number of countries, Indigenous Peoples were denied the
right to free, prior and informed consent, particularly in relation to large-scale projects.
Devastating economic, humanitarian and political crises across the Americas led to a
dramatic increase in the number of people leaving their home countries in search of safety.
Authorities in several countries failed to respect and protect the rights of refugees and
migrants. Countries increasingly employed military force to manage their growing numbers.
Impunity for human rights violations and crimes under international law remained
pervasive, with many countries continuing to evade international scrutiny. Brazil, Canada
and the USA were among the largest contributors to global greenhouse gas emissions. The
expansion of fossil fuel extraction and fossil fuel production in the region threatened global
climate goals. Governments failed to commit to rapidly and equitably phasing out the use
and production of all fossil fuels and fossil fuel subsidies. But all is not lost. Despite the
bleak outlook, human rights defenders and others speaking out to protect human rights
across the Americas continued to fight in the face of increased adversity to ensure that
structural changes are achieved with a view to creating a fairer and more equal region for
all.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION, ASSOCIATION AND PEACEFUL
ASSEMBLY
Civic space continued to shrink at an alarming rate across the Americas. In countries including
El Salvador, Nicaragua and Venezuela, where the right to freedom of expression was already
under threat, governments imposed further legal and institutional measures against civil
society groups in an attempt to silence critics. Between August 2022 and September 2023,
Nicaragua revoked the legal status of more than 2,000 NGOs, bringing the number of NGOs
closed since 2018 to 3,394. In August, the Central American University in Nicaragua was
closed, accused of being a “terrorism centre”, and properties belonging to entities including
the Red Cross were confiscated. In Cuba, in May, a new law granted the government power to

The State of the World’s Human Rights

33

order telecommunications providers to stop servicing users who published information
deemed harmful to public order or morality.
El Salvador saw an increase in protests in 2023, as the situation in the country continued to
deteriorate under the state of emergency imposed in March 2022. The authorities’ obstructive
response to these legitimate expressions of social discontent, which included stigmatization,
threats, excessive surveillance of organizers and restrictions of movement, violated people’s
rights to freedom of association and peaceful assembly.
In countries including Argentina, Bolivia, Cuba, El Salvador, Haiti, Paraguay, Peru, Puerto
Rico and Venezuela, authorities responded to public protests with repression. In Bolivia, the
Ombudsperson’s Office reported several instances of excessive use of force by police in
response to a series of protests in January following the arrest of the governor of Santa Cruz.
In Argentina, Canada, Cuba, Mexico, Puerto Rico and the USA, governments filed criminal
charges against peaceful protesters. Laws diluting legal obligations on the use of force were
passed in Chile. In the USA, 16 states introduced bills restricting the right to protest. The state
of North Carolina heightened penalties for existing “riot” offences and for protests occurring
near pipelines.
The Americas remains a dangerous place for journalists. Media workers were threatened,
harassed, killed and put under unlawful surveillance in Argentina, Colombia, Cuba,
the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Mexico, Paraguay and Venezuela. In the Dominican
Republic, evidence showed that Nuria Piera, a high-profile journalist who reports on corruption
and impunity, was targeted in 2020 and 2021 with NSO Group’s Pegasus spyware, which
enables unrestricted access to a device. The authorities denied involvement in the
surveillance. In Mexico, at least five journalists were killed in connection with their work,
according to the organization Article 19.
States must repeal laws and practices that hinder the rights to freedom of expression,
association and peaceful assembly. They must take additional measures to effectively
protect people’s rights to express their opinions and to safeguard the work of journalists.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The Americas continued to be one of the most dangerous regions in the world for human
rights defenders. Defenders working to protect land and the environment faced increased risks
in countries including Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Honduras and
Mexico. Black, Indigenous and women human rights defenders remained particularly at risk.
Governments and non-state actors used a variety of tools such as harassment, stigmatization,
criminalization and killings to stop human rights activists from doing their essential and
legitimate work in countries including Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru and Venezuela. In Brazil, an average of
three defenders had been murdered every month over the past four years, according to
Justiça Global. Honduras had the highest number of human rights defenders killed per capita
in the world, according to data from Global Witness. In July, a member of the Guapinol
community in Honduras was shot dead in broad daylight six months after two of his family
members were also killed. They had been campaigning against a mining company to protect
the river on which their subsistence depends. At the end of the year, the killings remained
unpunished.
Although most countries across the Americas lacked robust protection systems for human
rights defenders, Colombia showed some signs of improvement. In Colombia, the Ministry of
the Interior announced the strengthening of the collective protection programme for human
rights defenders from grassroots organizations and communities, targeting those defending
land and territory.

34

The State of the World’s Human Rights

States must ensure human rights defenders are able to carry out their activities safely by
developing effective protection programmes, or by improving existing ones, as well as
ensuring that those suspected of attacking activists are brought to justice.

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND UNFAIR TRIALS
Arbitrary detention remained widespread across the region. Authorities continued to violate
people’s rights to liberty, a fair trial and physical integrity in countries including Cuba, El
Salvador, Nicaragua and Venezuela. In the USA, many detentions had discriminatory
undertones.
In El Salvador, more than 73,000 arbitrary detentions had been recorded since the start of
the state of emergency in March 2022. Most detainees were accused of “illegal associations”,
a crime linked to gang activity and membership. These detentions violated due process
guarantees through the absence of judicial orders and the concealment of the identity of the
judges processing detainees.
In countries including El Salvador, Mexico, Nicaragua and Venezuela, detainees were often
tortured or ill-treated, and in some cases forcibly disappeared. In Venezuela, there were
around 15,700 arbitrary arrests between 2014 and 2023, and around 280 people remained in
detention for political reasons, according to civil society organizations. Student activist and
musician, John Álvarez, was detained on 30 August and was held incommunicado for over 24
hours. He was tortured and forced to incriminate a union leader and a journalist in a video
recorded by police officers. He was released in December.
Fair trial rights were not respected in a number of countries including Bolivia, Cuba, El
Salvador, Nicaragua, the USA and Venezuela. Thirty Muslim men remained arbitrarily and
indefinitely detained in the detention facility at the US naval base in Guantánamo Bay, Cuba,
in violation of international law. The men continued to be denied hearings despite the US
Supreme Court ruling in 2008 that they have a right to habeas corpus.
Authorities must guarantee rights to a fair trial and refrain from misusing the justice
system. States must fulfil the right to reparation of those who have suffered arbitrary
detention.

EXCESSIVE AND UNNECESSARY USE OF FORCE
Excessive and unnecessary use of force by law enforcement, including lethal force, permeated
the region, particularly in Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Cuba, the Dominican Republic,
Honduras, Mexico, Peru, Puerto Rico and the USA. In many cases, force was used
disproportionately with a racist bias. In Brazil, at least 394 people were killed in police
operations in the states of Bahia, Rio de Janeiro, and São Paulo between July and September,
as the government continued to disregard measures to reduce police violence, including the
use of body cameras. In the USA, at least 1,153 people were killed by police in 2023,
according to media sources. In Peru, the state responded to protests across the country by
using lethal force and excessively using less-than-lethal force, with a racist bias particularly
targeting Indigenous Peoples. The number of deaths during the protests amounted to 49
civilians and one police officer, and hundreds of people injured, in under two months. At least
20 of those cases could be considered extrajudicial executions.
Police reform advanced with mixed results in Chile and Colombia. Authorities in Colombia
introduced regulatory initiatives to change the structure and operation of some aspects of the
police force, including a new manual on the use of force during protests. Comprehensive
police reform was still pending.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

35

Militarization of security continued in a number of countries, including El Salvador and
Honduras, both of which had states of emergency in place. Ecuador and Mexico widened their
legal frameworks to allow for the use of armed forces in public security tasks.
Authorities must ensure law enforcement complies with international human rights law
and standards, including on the use of force. They must ensure that those suspected of
human rights violations are brought to justice.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Entrenched gender-based violence, including femicide, continued to be the norm across the
region and authorities systematically failed to address impunity for these crimes. In Mexico, an
average of nine women were murdered each day, according to the Executive Secretariat of the
National Public Security System and most cases were never effectively solved. In Canada, the
UN reported an increase in the number of Indigenous women and girls who were missing or
had been murdered, and high rates of sexual assault and exploitation among Indigenous
women, girls and two-spirit, lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans, queer, questioning, intersex and
asexual (2SLGBTQQIA+) people living near pipeline construction sites.
Access to sexual and reproductive rights remained extremely challenging throughout the
region, even in countries such as Argentina where abortion was legalized in 2020 and
Colombia where it was decriminalized in 2022. In El Salvador, a total ban on abortion
remained in place and at least 21 women were facing charges related to obstetric
emergencies. Chile made no progress in adopting a legal framework to fully decriminalize
abortion and ensure equal and barrier-free access to safe abortion services. In Brazil, abortion
remained a criminal offence; at least 19 people had died due to unsafe abortion by July,
according to the Ministry of Health. In September, a lawsuit seeking the decriminalization of
abortion in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy was put before the Federal Supreme Court, but
voting was suspended.
In some countries, the rollback on access to abortion expanded. Following the 2022 US
Supreme Court decision that ended federal protections to the right to abortion, 15 states
implemented total bans on abortion or bans with extremely limited exceptions. The measures
continued to disproportionately impact Black and other racialized people.
Nevertheless, some progress was made. In Honduras, abortion remained banned, but the
government ended 14 years of prohibition on the use and sale of the emergency contraceptive
pill. In Mexico, the Supreme Court declared the criminalization of abortion unconstitutional, as
well as the suspension of medical personnel for performing or assisting with abortions.
Authorities must end impunity for violent crimes against women and girls. They must also
guarantee access to safe abortion and other sexual and reproductive rights, including
comprehensive sex education.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
LGBTI people continued to face widespread harassment, discrimination, threats, violent
attacks and killings, as well as obstacles to legal recognition in countries including Argentina,
Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Guatemala, Honduras, Paraguay, Peru, Puerto Rico and the USA.
Impunity was the norm in most cases.
In Guatemala, where same-sex marriage remained illegal, at least 34 people were killed
because of their sexual orientation or gender identity, according to the National LGBTIQ+
Human Rights Observatory. More transgender people were killed in Brazil than anywhere else
in the world for the 14th consecutive year. In Peru, despite several reports of violence
against and killings of LGBTI people, there was still no official registry of hate crimes. In

36

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Paraguay, the judiciary rejected five lawsuits filed by transgender people demanding legal
recognition of their names in accordance with their gender identity. In the USA, the passage of
anti-LGBTI laws at state level increased dramatically. Only 54% of LGBTI adults in the USA
lived in states with hate crime laws covering sexual orientation and gender identity and
expression.
In Argentina, in April, Sofía Inés Fernández, a 40-year-old trans woman, was found dead in a
police station cell in the town of Derqui, Buenos Aires, where she had been detained for
alleged robbery. The accused police officers claimed that she had died by suicide, but the
preliminary autopsy revealed asphyxia as the cause of death.
Despite the bleak outlook, there was some progress. In Colombia, a person received a
university degree matching their non-binary identity for the first time in April.
Authorities must strengthen protection for LGBTI people, including by effectively
investigating reports of abuse and bringing perpetrators to justice.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Indigenous Peoples, historically subjected to racial discrimination and marginalization,
continued to be disproportionately affected by human rights violations. In Colombia, 45% of all
displacement victims in 2023 were Afro-descendants and 32% were Indigenous Peoples,
according to the OCHA. In Brazil, Sônia Guajajara, an Indigenous woman, became the first
minister of Indigenous Peoples. Brazil's Ministry of Health declared a national public health
emergency due to the lack of assistance available for the Yanomami People, who were
suffering from malnutrition, contamination, and sexual violence, largely caused by the
presence of illegal mining activities in their territory in the Amazon region.
In several countries including Argentina, Canada, Ecuador and Venezuela, the right to free,
prior and informed consent, particularly in relation to large-scale economic projects, was
denied. In Canada, the National Action Plan for the UN Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples, released by the government in June, did not include accountability
mechanisms, and free, prior-and-informed consent. Several Wet’suwet’en land defenders went
on trial in May and October for protecting their territory against the construction of a pipeline.
One was found not guilty in November; the others were awaiting decisions and could face
prison sentences if found guilty.
Land tenure and entitlement problems continued in a number of countries. In Paraguay, the
Tekoha Sauce Indigenous community of the Avá Guaraní Paranaense People were still waiting
for the restitution of their ancestral territory, which had been seized by hydroelectric power
company Itaipú Binacional. The company appealed a court decision that rejected an eviction
order to remove the community from another area of their ancestral land.
States must ensure Indigenous Peoples have ownership and control over their lands and
resources. They must implement policies to end violence against Indigenous Peoples and
guarantee justice, truth and reparation for the human rights violations they have endured.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Devastating political, humanitarian and economic crises across the Americas contributed to a
systematic increase in the number of people leaving their home countries in search of safety
and facing human rights violations in the process. More than 7.72 million Venezuelans had left
the country by the end of the year, according to figures from UNHCR, the UN refugee agency.
Authorities in Panama reported that 520,000 people crossed the border between Colombia
and Panama through the Darien Gap, more than double the total number in 2022. There was

The State of the World’s Human Rights

37

also a dramatic increase in the number of migrants, asylum seekers and refugees arriving in
Mexico with the aim of reaching the USA or Canada.
Authorities in a number of countries, including Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru and
the USA, failed to respect and protect the rights of migrants and refugees, including by
denying them their right to seek asylum. In the USA, following the termination of immigration
policy Title 42, the state implemented new migration measures that continued to drastically
limit access to asylum at the US-Mexico border. These included presuming ineligibility in the
majority of cases and mandatory use of a mobile phone app that offered limited appointments.
This resulted in many asylum seekers being stranded at the border in inhumane conditions
and exposed to violence and other abuses.
The US administration extended Temporary Protected Status for Haitian, Honduran,
Nepalese, Nicaraguan, Somali, South Sudanese, Sudanese, Ukrainian, Venezuelan and
Yemeni nationals, granting work authorization and protection from removal from the USA. A
parole process was instituted for Cubans, Haitians, Nicaraguans and Venezuelans, which
provided travel authorization for up to 30,000 individuals from these countries to enter the
USA each month with US-based sponsors.
US authorities continued to employ arbitrary mass immigration detention, using private
prisons to detain people seeking safety. In Canada, the provinces of Ontario, Quebec,
Saskatchewan and New Brunswick announced an end to their immigration detention
arrangements with the Canada Border Services Agency, joining British Columbia, Alberta,
Manitoba and Nova Scotia in their commitment not to detain individuals solely on immigration
grounds by July 2024. In Mexico, where detention conditions for migrants and asylum seekers
were particularly dire, the Supreme Court issued a landmark ruling in March declaring that the
maximum period of detention in an immigration detention centre was 36 hours, after which
authorities had the obligation to release migrants and asylum seekers.
The deployment of the military to manage the rising numbers of migrants and refugees
arriving at their territories expanded across the region. In Chile, in February, the government
deployed military troops along its borders with Bolivia and Peru to prevent the irregular entry of
people seeking safety, mostly affecting Venezuelans.
Venezuelans in Chile, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru faced significant barriers to access an
asylum procedure and other temporary or complementary protection programmes. As a result,
many could not regularize their status and access essential services, including health services.
Authorities continued to fail to protect Venezuelan women facing gender-based violence, who
were at particular risk. Many did not report the violence out of fear, mistrust or misinformation,
and could not access services due to lack of regular status.
In the Dominican Republic, discrimination against Haitians or people of Haitian descent and
anti-Black racism persisted and put migrants, asylum seekers, refugees, women and girls and
LGBTI people at particular risk. Immigration authorities and law enforcement officials raided
hospitals to conduct discriminatory searches for Haitian women and girls to arbitrarily arrest
and deport them.
Authorities must urgently cease unlawful deportations, respect the principle of nonrefoulement and refrain from detaining refugees and migrants. States must also ensure
everyone can apply for asylum and access a fair and effective asylum procedure, especially
those fleeing mass human rights violations, and they must provide refugees the protection
they are entitled to. They must combat racism and xenophobia against migrants, refugees,
and asylum seekers.

38

The State of the World’s Human Rights

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND REPARATION
Impunity for human rights violations, including crimes under international law, continued to be
the norm in countries including Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti,
Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela, with advances in some countries.
In Bolivia, in October, the Interdisciplinary Group of Independent Experts for Bolivia reported
that there had been little progress in the investigations into human rights violations committed
in the context of the 2019 political crisis, during which 37 people died and hundreds were
injured by the security forces. Investigations into killings by the police in Brazil were also
ineffective. The three police officers indicted for the murder of activist Pedro Henrique Cruz in
2018 in Tucano, Bahia, had still not been brought to trial and his mother, Ana Maria,
continued to suffer threats and intimidation. In Chile, impunity continued for the majority of
human rights violations committed during the 2019 social upheaval. According to the Attorney
General’s Office in Chile, charges where only filed in 127 of the 10,142 complaints made by
victims of violations committed at that time. These resulted in 38 convictions and 17
acquittals.
In Ecuador, human rights violations committed by security forces in the context of protests in
2019 and 2022 remained unpunished. In June, Executive Decree 755 stipulated that law
enforcement officials suspected of having caused injury or harm to, or the death of, a person
could only be apprehended or removed from office following conviction. In Colombia, as of
June, little progress had been made in the implementation of the 2016 Peace Agreement.
Nevertheless, justice, truth and reparation processes did advance in some jurisdictions,
including Argentina and Chile. In Argentina, trials before ordinary civilian courts continued for
crimes against humanity committed under the 1976-1983 military regime. In Chile, the
national search plan for people who had disappeared during the regime of Augusto
Pinochet (1973-1990) was presented; its implementation remained pending. The government
also announced a National Memory and Heritage Policy for the protection of memorial sites
related to this period.
In June, the Pre-Trial Chamber of the ICC authorized the Office of the Prosecutor to resume
his investigation into crimes against humanity in Venezuela, and an Argentinian federal
prosecutor launched an investigation into crimes against humanity in Venezuela based on the
principle of universal jurisdiction.
States must commit to combat impunity and guarantee truth, justice and reparations.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
States across the Americas region, particularly Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Ecuador,
Mexico, Peru and the USA, have failed to take sufficient and effective measures to ensure
people’s right to a healthy environment and mitigate the effects of the climate crisis on human
rights. This was particularly evident in the context of large-scale extractive projects that
disproportionately affected Indigenous Peoples, fence-line communities living in the vicinity of
these projects and other marginalized groups who are exceptionally vulnerable to
environmental degradation. Despite Bolivia’s commitment to maintain its forest cover, human
rights defenders highlighted insufficient measures to prevent an intense forest fire season –
worsened by climate change – towards the end of the year.
Many countries criminalized people, including Indigenous Peoples, who had actively
protested extractive development projects that had a negative impact on the environment and
vulnerable carbon sinks.
In 2023, global temperatures and greenhouse gas emissions reached record highs. Although
the contributions of countries in the Americas varied significantly, Brazil, Canada and the USA

The State of the World’s Human Rights

39

were among the largest contributors to greenhouse gas emissions in the region and globally.
The expansion of fossil fuel extraction and projects that involve the burning of gas associated
with the extraction of crude oil (gas flaring) in the region, as well as the maintenance of fossil
fuel subsidies, threatened the global climate goals set in the Paris Agreement. Governments of
the region failed to commit to rapidly and equitably phasing out the use and production of all
fossil fuels and all types of fossil fuel subsidies.
Authorities must urgently address the effects of the climate crisis on human rights by
developing region-wide climate action. Industrialized and other high-emitting countries in
the region must take the lead in climate mitigation, including by stopping the expansion of
fossil fuel production and subsidies. Governments must also ensure protection for
Indigenous Peoples and human rights defenders campaigning for climate justice and
environmental rights. Developed countries in the region must also urgently scale up climate
finance to support lower-income, developing countries’ mitigation and adaptation
strategies, and commit to providing additional dedicated funding for loss and damage.

ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL RIGHTS
Poverty and extreme poverty rates in the region, which increased significantly during the
Covid-19 pandemic, returned to pre-pandemic levels in 2023, but countries continued to fail
to take the necessary steps to meet the target to end poverty by 2030. Nearly 30% of the
population in Latin America (183 million people) continued to live in poverty and 11.4% (72
million) in extreme poverty. Inequality remained the main challenge for countries to be able to
promote inclusive growth and development, with 34% of total income in Latin America
concentrated in the richest 10% of the population.
States must take robust measures – fiscal and budgetary – to tackle poverty and
inequality and to ensure they meet their human rights obligations regarding the rights to
health, education, housing and social security and access to essential services and goods.

40

The State of the World’s Human Rights

ASIA-PACIFIC REGIONAL OVERVIEW
There were modest gains for the rights of women and LGBTI people in several countries; a
new law criminalizing torture and enforced disappearance was adopted in Thailand; and the
mandatory death penalty was abolished in Malaysia. Yet, overall, the outlook for human
rights in the Asia-Pacific region remained bleak.
Escalating armed conflict in Myanmar resulted in yet more civilian deaths and
displacement. In Afghanistan, the Taliban intensified their repression especially against
women and girls. A growing intolerance of dissent was evident throughout much of the
region as restrictions on the rights to freedom of expression, assembly and association
tightened in multiple countries and territories. Critics of government policies and actions,
including human rights defenders, political activists and journalists, were arbitrarily
arrested and detained; protests against injustice were often met with unlawful, sometimes
lethal, force.
Long-standing patterns of discrimination against religious and ethnic minorities and socalled lower castes, women and girls, LGBTI people and Indigenous Peoples persisted.
People belonging to these and other marginalized groups were particularly hard hit in
countries suffering economic crises. They were also the first to suffer the often-deadly
consequence of climate-change induced weather events, yet governments across the region
failed to take effective action to curb carbon emissions or to put in place effective
protection and adaptation measures.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The right to freedom of expression remained under threat as many governments intensified
crackdowns on media, human rights defenders, opposition parties, government critics and
others.
Several countries maintained or intensified already extreme restrictions. In Afghanistan,
journalists and other media workers were among those subjected to harassment and arbitrary
detention, and more media outlets were shut down or were forced to close their doors. In
Myanmar, journalists were among those sentenced to long terms of imprisonment in unfair
trials. In North Korea, there was no let-up in the government’s total control over civic space
with harsh penalties imposed on anyone who criticized the government or engaged in
“reactionary” ideology.
Elsewhere, government efforts to silence critical voices took multiple forms. New laws or
regulations restricting the rights to freedom of expression came into force in Bangladesh,
China, India, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea and Singapore. The new government in Fiji
repealed a law limiting media freedoms, but other restrictive legislation remained.
In Cambodia, the licence of one of the few remaining independent media outlets was
revoked. The Indian government weaponized the central financial and investigation agencies
to carry out raids on and suspend the licences of media outlets and human rights
organizations. Bhutan, where civil servants are barred from sharing information of public
interest with the media, slipped down global press freedom rankings.
Censorship and surveillance technologies were increasingly used to suppress dissent. In
China, new guidelines placed further restrictions on social media users, while social media
companies required certain users to disclose their identity, raising concerns about the right to
privacy. In Hong Kong, the draconian National Security Law and colonial-era sedition law were

The State of the World’s Human Rights

41

used to censor books, songs, social media and other on- and offline content. In Viet Nam,
Amnesty International found that state agents, or persons acting on their behalf, were likely
behind a campaign targeting dozens of social media accounts using Predator spyware, while
the Thai government failed to address concerns about its use of Pegasus spyware against
human rights defenders, politicians and civil society activists.
Judicial harassment of those who shared information or expressed views critical of or deemed
sensitive by governments was also commonplace. Journalists and activists in Viet Nam were
prosecuted and imprisoned for “disseminating propaganda against the state”. In the Maldives,
journalists were arrested for reporting on protests and other events. In Malaysia, the
government not only failed to act on pledges to repeal laws restricting the rights to freedom of
expression, but continued to use them to investigate film makers and book editors among
others. In Thailand, authorities persisted in applying laws restricting online communication to
prosecute critics, while government critics in the Philippines continued to face spurious
charges. Peaceful calls for Papuan independence remained an imprisonable offence in
Indonesia. In Laos, long-standing patterns of intimidation, arbitrary detention as well as
unlawful killing, and enforced disappearance against human rights defenders continued.
Likewise in Pakistan, journalists, human rights defenders and critics of the government and
military establishment were among those subjected to arbitrary arrest and enforced
disappearance.
There were signs that transnational repression of dissent was becoming entrenched. Chinese
and Hong Kong authorities pursued activists, including nationals who had fled abroad, issuing
arrest warrants, offering financial rewards and pressuring other countries to repatriate them.
Two human rights defenders returned from Laos were subsequently detained in China. The
Viet Nam authorities were implicated in the abduction from Thailand of a prominent YouTuber,
while a Laotian human rights defender was shot dead in Thailand.
Governments must repeal all laws and regulations that criminalize or otherwise restrict
legitimate expression, end all unjustified investigations or prosecutions related to the
legitimate exercise of the right to freedom of expression, and respect media freedoms.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY AND ASSOCIATION
With the exception of Fiji, where there were signs of greater tolerance, governments across the
region sought to further curtail the right to peaceful assembly.
In Thailand criminal charges had been brought against nearly 2,000 people by the end of the
year in connection with their participation in protests for political and social reform which
began in 2020. The number of people detained for taking part in events to commemorate
victims of an apartment block fire in Urumqi, China, in 2022 and associated protests against
Covid-19 restrictions will probably never be known, but there were reports of ongoing
harassment of participants and a Uyghur student was sentenced to three years’ imprisonment
for posting a video of the protests on social media. In Malaysia and Mongolia, authorities
continued to use repressive laws to restrict the right to peaceful protest, while in South Korea,
the increasingly hard line against “illegal” protests set the scene for extortionate claims for
damages by a state-owned company against disability rights campaigners. In Myanmar,
dozens of people were arrested for wearing flowers to mark the birthday of the imprisoned
former State Counsellor Aung San Suu Kyi.
Unlawful use of force leading to injuries and sometimes deaths remained common. In
Afghanistan, the Taliban reportedly used firearms, water cannons and stun guns to disperse
demonstrations including protests in support of women’s rights, among others. Authorities in
both Pakistan and Sri Lanka sought to ban protests and frequently resorted to excessive and
other unlawful force against protesters ‒ deaths and many injuries resulted in both countries.

42

The State of the World’s Human Rights

In Bangladesh, police used rubber bullets, live rounds and tear gas against opposition-led
protests resulting in at least one death. Thousands of people were arrested. Security forces
also used unlawful force against protesters in Indonesia, the Maldives and Nepal.
Restrictions on the rights to freedom of association also deepened in several countries. In
Cambodia, the only opposition party was disqualified from taking part in elections and a
leading opposition politician sentenced to 27 years’ imprisonment. In the Philippines, human
rights and humanitarian organizations were among those accused of links to banned
communist groups or “red-tagged”, leaving their members vulnerable to trumped-up charges,
unlawful killing and other human rights violations. In South Korea, trade unions faced an
increasingly hostile environment and dozens of labour activists were placed under criminal
investigation.
Governments must respect and facilitate the exercise of the rights to freedom of peaceful
assembly and association. The work of human rights defenders must be respected and
protected and a safe and enabling environment for their work ensured.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Human rights defenders, political and environmental activists and others were arbitrarily
arrested and detained for challenging government policies and actions or on the basis of their
ethnic, religious or other identity.
In China, arbitrary detention and unfair trials of Uyghurs and people from other
predominantly Muslim ethnic minorities in Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region continued. In
Myanmar, more than 20,000 people remained in detention for opposing the 2021 military
coup and grossly unfair trials continued.
In Pakistan, the authorities used the Maintenance of Public Order Ordinance and the vaguely
worded Anti-Terrorism Act to arbitrarily detain over 4,000 people involved in protests following
the arrest of former prime minister Imran Khan in May. Another 103 civilians, including
political leaders and activists, were put on trial in military courts. Although the courts in India
granted bail or quashed detention orders of several arbitrarily detained journalists in Jammu
and Kashmir, human rights defenders there and elsewhere in the country continued to be held
without trial, often for years.
In Mongolia, inadequate procedural guarantees resulted in high numbers of arrests without
warrants.
Governments must end all arbitrary arrests and detention of government critics and others
and immediately release anyone detained solely for the peaceful exercise of their rights to
freedom of expression, peaceful assembly, association or other human rights.

IMPUNITY AND THE RIGHT TO JUSTICE
Impunity remained widespread and victims were routinely denied their rights to justice, truth
and reparation.
Although the decision by the International Criminal Court to resume investigations in the
Philippines offered some hope for families of the countless victims of unlawful killings during
the ongoing “war on drugs”, accountability for serious human rights violations there remained
almost completely elusive. In Thailand, impunity prevailed for unlawful killings by state security
forces. The governments of Sri Lanka and Nepal again failed to make significant progress
towards delivering justice, truth and reparations to the tens of thousands of victims of crimes
under international law and other grave human rights violations during the respective internal
armed conflicts.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

43

Governments must address impunity by undertaking thorough, independent, impartial,
investigations into crimes under international law and other serious human rights abuses,
and by bringing suspected perpetrators to justice in fair trials. Full cooperation should be
extended to international investigations and justice processes and reparations provided for
historical human rights abuses.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW
Violations of international humanitarian law persisted in Myanmar, where indiscriminate and
targeted air and ground attacks by the military and associated militias spread across the
country resulting in over 1,000 civilian deaths. There were also reports of attacks by armed
opposition groups on civilians linked to Myanmar’s military authorities. In the context of
ongoing armed resistance to the Taliban in Afghanistan’s Panjshir province, there was new
evidence of enforced collective punishments against the civilian population and extrajudicial
executions of captured fighters from the National Resistance Front, while attacks by armed
groups, primarily the Islamic State of Khorasan Province, resulted in thousands of casualties.
All parties to armed conflicts must abide by international humanitarian law, including by
ending indiscriminate or direct attacks against civilians or civilian infrastructure.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS
Several countries remained mired in serious economic crises. Skyrocketing inflation in Laos
and Pakistan and resulting cost of living hikes impacted the most vulnerable to
marginalization. In Sri Lanka, where over a quarter of the population risked falling below the
poverty line, access to food, healthcare and other basic needs became a daily challenge,
particularly for daily wage earners and Malaiyaha Tamils. The humanitarian crisis in
Afghanistan deepened, leading to fears of a further increase in the already high numbers of
people reliant on humanitarian aid – yet the humanitarian response plan remained woefully
underfunded.
In Papua New Guinea, chronic under-resourcing of the health system meant that much of
the population could not access adequate healthcare. Food insecurity persisted in North Korea
and healthcare including essential medicines and vaccines were often unavailable.
Forced evictions and house demolitions left thousands of people homeless and destitute or at
risk thereof. In Cambodia, the process of forcibly evicting 10,000 families from the UNESCO
World Heritage Site of Angkor continued. Close to 300,000 people were made homeless in
India following the demolition of informal settlements in Delhi ahead of the G20 Summit, and
demolitions of largely Muslim homes, businesses and places of worship continued in
punishment for communal violence. In Indonesia, authorities responded with excessive force
to communities protesting against planned evictions and infrastructure development projects,
while in Laos the construction of a dam threatened to displace thousands of villagers, without
adequate arrangements for compensation.
Cultural and linguistic rights and the right to education for ethnic minorities across China,
were undermined by government policies including assimilationist policies targeting Tibetan
and Uyghur children.
Governments should ensure that economic, social and cultural rights are protected and
that policies do not compound the violations of rights to food, health, and livelihood.

44

The State of the World’s Human Rights

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
Corporate accountability for human rights abuses too often remained elusive. However,
Amnesty International’s research on Myanmar contributed to positive developments, with
several companies linked to the supply of aviation fuel that was used by the Myanmar military
in air strikes against civilians ceasing their involvement. Also, the EU, the UK, the USA and
other countries passed targeted sanctions against some of these companies.
Governments must put in place legislation that requires corporate actors to conduct
human rights due diligence to ensure that their operations and those of their partners do
not cause or contribute to human rights abuses, and that any harm resulting from their
operations is remedied.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Freedom of religion or belief remained under threat, especially in South Asia. In India,
hundreds of incidents of violence and intimidation of Muslims were recorded. Violence against
religious minorities was also widespread in Pakistan, where Ahmadi grave sites were
desecrated, and allegations of blasphemy used to target minorities including to justify attacks
against over 20 churches in a single day. In Afghanistan, religious minorities including Shia’s
and Hazara Shia’s, Sikhs, Hindus, Christians, Ahmadiyya and Ismailis faced extreme
discrimination under the Taliban, who also ensured formal religious teaching was exclusively
based on the Sunni sect of Islam.
Governments must take effective measures, including legal and policy reforms where
required, to fully protect, promote and guarantee freedom of religion or belief without
discrimination.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Legal protections against sexual violence were strengthened in Japan where the definition of
rape under criminal law was extended to include non-consensual sex. In Fiji, legal obstacles to
participation in elections for married women were removed.
But the reality for many women and girls in the region remained one of systemic
discrimination and violence.
High numbers of incidents of harassment and violence including rape and other sexual
violence, continued to be reported particularly in South Asia, and accountability was rare. In
India, there was particular concern about the high number of incidents of sexual violence
against Dalits, Adivasi and Kuki women by members of dominant castes.
Discrimination took many forms. In Afghanistan, the ever more extreme restrictions on
women’s and girls’ rights and the scale of human rights violations against them reached the
level of the crime against humanity of gender persecution. In Nepal, women continued to be
denied equal citizenship rights. In Bhutan, Fiji, Japan and elsewhere women remained
significantly under-represented in public office and the work force.
Governments must accelerate efforts to uphold and promote women’s and girls’ rights,
end gender and intersectional discrimination against women and girls and prevent and
prosecute gender-based violence.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
There was both progress in and setbacks to LGBTI rights. In Taiwan, authorities recognized the
right of most transnational same-sex couples to marry and on 21 December, Thai lawmakers

The State of the World’s Human Rights

45

began a process of legalizing same-sex marriages. Court rulings in Hong Kong, Nepal and
South Korea gave greater recognition to the rights of same-sex couples and/or transgender
people. However, in South Korea the Constitutional Court upheld the criminalization of
consensual same-sex sexual relations within the Korean military. In addition, governments
typically reacted by appealing against rights-affirming judgments and dragging their feet on
implementation.
The precarious position of LGBTI individuals and groups was also illustrated in China, where
a prominent LGBTI organization was forced to close in the face of the government’s ongoing
anti-LGBTI campaign. In Pakistan, political and Islamist groups led a disinformation campaign
that put existing legal protections for transgender (Khawaja Sara) people at risk and resulted in
increased violence against and harassment of transgender and gender diverse people. In
India, the Supreme Court refused to grant legal recognition to same-sex marriage. In Malaysia,
books and other materials considered to promote LGBTI lifestyles were banned and in
Mongolia a pro-LGBTI march was banned.
Governments should repeal laws and policies that discriminate against LGBTI people,
including by decriminalizing consensual same-sex sexual relations, and should recognize
same-sex marriage, promote and protect LGBTI people’s rights and enable them to live in
safety and dignity.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS AND ETHNIC AND CASTEBASED DISCRIMINATION
Discrimination against Indigenous Peoples and on the basis of ethnicity and caste remained
widespread. In countries including Cambodia, Indonesia and Malaysia, Indigenous Peoples’
rights were ignored as commercial exploitation of their lands threatened their lives and
livelihoods. Consultations with affected communities, where they occurred, were often
superficial and Indigenous Peoples’ activists were vulnerable to human rights abuses. In the
Philippines, two Indigenous environmental protection activists were forcibly disappeared and
Indigenous Peoples’ rights leaders designated as terrorists.
An historic opportunity to progress the rights of First Nations People in Australia was lost with
the rejection in a national referendum of a proposal to establish an Indigenous “Voice” that
would have enabled them to make direct representations to parliament. In New Zealand, Māori
people continued to experience discrimination and marginalization including in the criminal
justice system where they continued to be significantly over-represented. In India, caste-based
discrimination continued unabated.
Governments must ensure effective access to justice to victims of ethnic and caste-based
discrimination, end impunity for human rights abuses against Dalits, Indigenous Peoples
and other at-risk groups, and prioritize policies and programmes to eliminate structural
discrimination including in the criminal justice system.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The criminalization of torture and enforced disappearances in Thailand underscored the power
of concerted campaigning by victims and human rights defenders, but there remained much
to be done there and elsewhere to prevent torture and other forms of ill-treatment.
Multiple instances of torture and other ill-treatment of detainees were reported across the
region, and deaths in custody were all too common. At least 94 detainees died in custody
during the year in Bangladesh and at least 13 in Malaysia. The Nepali authorities failed to hold
anyone accountable for the many credible allegations of torture and other ill-treatment. In

46

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Afghanistan, torture of detainees was reportedly widespread and public corporal punishment
amounting to torture or other ill-treatment was used. The Indonesian military was responsible
for the arbitrary detention, torture and deaths in custody of Indigenous Papuan civilians,
including children.
Governments must prohibit and criminalize torture and other acts of ill-treatment and
take effective measures to protect and prevent abuse of marginalized and at-risk groups.
Where they occur, states must investigate allegations, hold those responsible to account
and provide victims with timely remedy.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Devastating floods, soaring temperatures and deadly typhoons highlighted the vulnerability of
the region to events induced by climate change. Yet measures to reduce carbon emissions
and for preparedness and adaptation remained largely inadequate. As ever, the poorest and
most marginalized suffered the gravest consequences for these failures.
The high death toll among ethnic Rohingya from a cyclone that hit Myanmar in May was
largely attributable to the appalling conditions in which they have lived since being forcibly
displaced in 2012. In India, almost 200 deaths were recorded in floods in the Himalayan
region and heatwaves in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar states. Pakistan continued to experience
searing climate change-induced heatwaves that severely impacted health, particularly of those
living in poverty and informal sector workers.
Mitigation efforts, starting with emissions targets set by many states, including the biggest
emitters, remained insufficient to keep the increase in average global temperatures below
1.5˚C above pre-industrial levels. Policies and actions were often inconsistent with meeting
targets to which states had committed. For example, Taiwan adopted legislation requiring the
government to reduce emissions, but there was no timeline for phasing out fossil fuels and oil
exploration continued.
There was little sign of reducing reliance on coal in the region’s energy systems. On the
contrary, new coal-fired plants and coal mining projects continued to be authorized by
governments in Australia, China, Indonesia and South Korea, often in the face of strong
domestic opposition. Japan was the only industrialized country in the world not to have
committed to phasing out the use of coal in electricity production.
States repeatedly ignored the impact of extractive industries on the environment and on
Indigenous Peoples and other affected communities. In Mongolia for example, there was still
insufficient action to address the impact of mining operations in the Gobi region on the health
and livelihoods of herder communities. In Papua New Guinea, the government issued a
licence to reopen a gold mining operation previously associated with serious human rights
abuses and environmental damage, despite these not being adequately addressed by the
company involved.
Industrialized and other high-emitting countries in the region must take the lead in
climate mitigation, including by stopping the expansion of fossil fuel production and
subsidies, and ensure that their climate policies are consistent with keeping global
warming within 1.5°C. Governments must increase investment in disaster preparedness
and adaptation and prioritize the protection of marginalized and other groups
disproportionately impacted by the climate crisis.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

47

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS AND HUMAN
TRAFFICKING
The indefinite detention of refugees and asylum seekers was ruled unconstitutional by courts
in both Australia and South Korea, but protections for refugees, asylum seekers and migrants
remained inadequate across the region and their human rights were widely disregarded.
Many refugees and migrants were arbitrarily and indefinitely detained, including in squalid
immigration detention centres, or were denied adequate housing and basic services and
lacked freedom of movement.
The Malaysian authorities failed to investigate the deaths of 150 people, including women
and children, in immigration detention centres in 2022 and, in the meantime, concerns about
conditions in the centres persisted. In Bangladesh, a fire in one camp and a cyclone rendered
thousands of Rohingya refugees homeless yet again. In Thailand, a new mechanism for
screening refugees and asylum seekers was established, but their indefinite detention
continued, and poor conditions resulted in the deaths of two Uyghur men. A new immigration
law in Japan sanctioned the continuation of indefinite detention of refugees and asylum
seekers, while amendments to Taiwan’s immigration law failed to include protections against
refoulement.
There was serious concern about the fate of hundreds of North Koreans forcibly repatriated
by the Chinese government despite warnings that they would likely face severe punishment.
Following the Pakistan government’s October announcement that unregistered Afghan
refugees must leave the country within a month, over 490,000 people were forcibly returned to
Afghanistan which many had fled for fear of persecution by the Taliban. Malaysia also violated
the principle of non-refoulement by forcibly returning refugees to Myanmar where they faced
serious human rights violations.
Government responses to human trafficking in Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar and Thailand
remained inadequate, where foreign workers were recruited by deceptive means and forced,
often under threat of violence, to work in cyber scams and illegal gambling operations.
Governments must cease detaining asylum seekers on the basis of their immigration
status and allow them to seek international protection. In no circumstances should anyone
be forcibly returned to a place where they could face persecution or other human rights
violations. Protections against human trafficking should be strengthened and survivors
provided with legal and other support including for facilitation of repatriation where safe to
do so.

DEATH PENALTY
In a positive move, the government of Malaysia repealed the mandatory death penalty for all
offences and abolished the death penalty entirely for seven offences. However, the death
penalty continued to be used extensively throughout the region, frequently in violation of
international law and standards. In both China and Viet Nam, executions were reported but
figures on the use of the death penalty remained classified as state secrets. In Afghanistan,
death sentences were reported to have been imposed, including by methods such as stoning,
found by UN bodies to amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. In
Singapore, a woman was among those executed for drugs related offences, while anti-death
penalty activists and lawyers were subjected to harassment.
Governments that still retain the death penalty must take urgent steps to abolish it.

48

The State of the World’s Human Rights

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
The criminalization of children continued to be of concern in several countries. In both
Australia and New Zealand, children as young as 10 years old could still be detained and
youth detention facilities in both were also found to endanger children. In Thailand, nearly 300
children were among those criminally charged for their participation in the largely peaceful
protests over recent years. They included a young man who was sentenced to one year’s
prison sentence, suspended for two years, for participating in a mock fashion show in 2020 –
when he was 16 years old – satirizing the monarch. In North Korea, reports of the widespread
use of forced labour including by children continued.
Governments must never arrest or detain children for exercising their rights, including to
freedom of peaceful assembly and expression. Governments should raise the minimum age
of criminal responsibility to 14 years or above and must ensure children in conflict with the
law are treated in accordance with the principles of child justice, including by strictly
limiting the use of detention.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

49

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA REGIONAL
OVERVIEW
EASTERN EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Human rights and freedoms remained under profound and constant assault, fuelled by
Russia’s ongoing war against Ukraine which drove hardening authoritarianism across the
region. Governments persecuted human rights defenders, suppressed dissent and often
effectively criminalized the right to free expression and independent human rights
information as “fake news” and attempts to “discredit” policies or institutions. Prospects
for effective human rights promotion and protection were bleak.
War became a “new normal” in the region. Azerbaijan’s blockade of a key route into the
breakaway territory of Nagorno-Karabakh created a humanitarian crisis endangering the
lives of thousands of people and, following its military offensive, over 100,000 people were
displaced to Armenia almost overnight.
Russia’s unceasing aggression against Ukraine grew into a war of attrition, with the list of
war crimes and other crimes under international law constantly increasing. Civilians,
including children, endured egregious suffering, through loss of life and injuries,
destruction of homes and key infrastructure, continued mass displacement and
environmental danger and destruction.
Efforts to establish international justice mechanisms prompted by the war in Ukraine and
including on the crime of aggression, failed to deliver. The ICC issued an arrest warrant for
President Vladimir Putin but Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Saudi Arabia were among nonICC parties which hosted his visits.
Beyond the military conflicts, discrimination and reprisals against religious minorities
were common. Torture and other ill-treatment remained endemic and those suspected of
criminal responsibility enjoyed impunity. Violence against women and domestic violence
persisted at high levels. Gender rights were in retreat. Air pollution, mainly from the
burning of fossil fuels, blighted human health in countries across the region.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Freedom of expression spiralled severely downwards as a growing palette of reprisals was
deployed against critical voices, spanning accusations of “extremism”, “justification of
terrorism”, “dissemination of knowingly false information” and LGBTI “propaganda”.
Russia reached new heights of wartime censorship, sparing none among dissenting voices.
Thousands were penalized, and hundreds faced unfounded criminal prosecution, including
opposition activist Vladimir Kara-Murza, sentenced to 25 years for “state treason”.
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Kazakhstan and Tajikistan amongst others locked up scores of
government critics. Kyrgyzstan’s draft media law forbade dissemination of “materials that harm
the health and morality of the population”. In Turkmenistan, free information remained
suppressed such that shortages of essential food items and forced labour were hidden from
view.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Throughout the region civil society was constrained or shut down, with Russia continuing to
provide a vicious blueprint. There, an ever-growing number of individuals and civil society

50

The State of the World’s Human Rights

organizations were labelled “foreign agents” or “undesirable organizations”, limiting their
participation in public life. The criminal code was also amended to penalize “carrying out
activities” of foreign NGOs without registered offices in Russia, effectively criminalizing any
forms of cooperation with most civil society groups outside the country. Leading human rights
organizations including the Moscow Helsinki Group, Sakharov Centre and Sova Centre were
shut down.
Belarus closed prominent human rights group Viasna, among scores of other independent
civil society organizations, and imprisoned its leading members for years. Kyrgyzstan plumbed
new depths when a draft law “On Foreign Representatives”, modelled on Russia’s “foreign
agents” law, moved toward adoption and threatened the closure of numerous NGOs. In
Moldova, Shansa party members were arbitrarily denied the possibility of standing in local
elections.
In a rare story of success, widespread public protest in Georgia against a draft Law on
Transparency of Foreign Influence forced its withdrawal.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
Authorities across the region severely restricted peaceful street protest, already rare or nonexistent in many countries, while large pro-government rallies were held in Russia and
elsewhere. Unlawful use of force by law enforcement was a norm. Kyrgyzstan imposed a near
blanket ban on peaceful demonstrations in the capital Bishkek and in some regions.
Authorities in Belarus and Kazakhstan continued to identify and jail peaceful participants in
past protests.
Police in Georgia deployed tear gas and water cannons to break up a largely peaceful protest
in March. In Turkmenistan, police used unnecessary and disproportionate force to stop
protests against bread shortages.
Authorities must stop using pretexts to repress dissent and prevent discussion of their
human rights records. They must end the harassment and prosecution of critical voices,
stop security forces using unlawful force during protests and repeal or amend legislation
violating the right to peaceful assembly.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Discrimination and reprisals against religious minorities were common across the region.
Tajikistan continued with repressive practices against Ismailis including penalizing collective
prayer in private homes. Jehovah’s Witnesses were imprisoned for practising their faith in
Russia and Russian-occupied Ukrainian territories, and law enforcement authorities targeted
Catholic priests in Belarus and those of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (effectively
subordinated to the Russian Orthodox Church) in Ukraine. Devout Muslims in Uzbekistan
continued to be prosecuted on overly broad and vaguely worded extremism-related charges.
Governments must take effective measures to implement legal and policy reforms to fully
protect, promote and guarantee freedom of religion or belief without discrimination.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In many countries torture and other ill-treatment remained endemic and those suspected of
criminal responsibility enjoyed impunity. In Belarus those imprisoned under politically
motivated charges faced inhumane conditions, including incommunicado detention and lack
of adequate healthcare. In Kazakhstan, five of the six officially acknowledged cases of death
caused by torture following protests in January 2022 reached court by the end of 2023, while
most others were dropped for alleged lack of evidence. In Moldova detainees continued to
suffer overcrowding and unsanitary conditions and poor health provision. In Georgia former
president Mikheil Saakashvili was denied release on humanitarian grounds despite severely

The State of the World’s Human Rights

51

deteriorating health and reported lack of adequate medical care. Aleksei Navalny in Russia
was subjected to enforced disappearance and repeated arbitrary solitary confinement.
Governments must act urgently to end torture and other ill-treatment, bringing all those
suspected of criminal responsibility to justice in fair trials.

GENDER-BASED DISCRIMINATION AND VIOLENCE
In Uzbekistan, domestic violence was criminalized for the first time. However, war and
legislation entrenching “traditional” and “family” values framed increasing gender-based
violence and violence against women in the region. In Ukraine, an all-time high of domestic
violence was recorded amidst the raging war, and Kyrgyzstan saw widespread abuse and
sexual violence against children with disabilities, including girls. Sexist, misogynist language
against political opponents, especially by the ruling party, was on the rise in Georgia, while
women in Azerbaijan faced various forms of gender-based violence, including being targeted
as instruments of political revenge.
Governments must implement comprehensive policies to prevent gender-based violence
against women and girls, including by tackling entrenched gender discrimination and
harmful stereotypes, ensure access to protection and support for survivors and address
impunity for related crimes.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine was marked by persistent war crimes. Indiscriminate
attacks by Russian forces on populated areas and civilian energy and grain export
infrastructure were common. Both Russian and Ukrainian forces used cluster munitions
despite their inherently indiscriminate nature and lasting risks for civilians. Ukraine was
estimated as the world’s most heavily mined country. Torture and other ill-treatment of
prisoners of war in Russia and Russian occupied territories of Ukraine was widespread. A
Moscow court upheld a 13-year sentence against Ukrainian human rights defender Maksym
Butkevych for a purported war crime he could not have committed.
Further to Azerbaijan’s military takeover of Nagorno-Karabakh, no progress was reported in
investigating violations of international humanitarian law by either Azerbaijani or Armenian
forces, including disproportionate and indiscriminate attacks and reports of torture and killings
of captives in previous years in that region.
All allegations of war crimes and crimes against humanity should be subject to impartial
and independent investigations, including through the principle of universal jurisdiction.

UNFAIR TRIALS
Judicial systems in many countries were deployed to crack down on rather than protect
human rights.
In Russia, courts demonstrated a profound bias against defendants and trials on charges of
terrorism, extremism and high treason were habitually closed to the public.
The Belarusian judiciary continued to be weaponized to crack down on all dissent
including by lawyers and human rights defenders. Sviatlana Tsikhnouskaya, Pavel Latushka,
Maria Maroz, Volha Kavalkova and Sharhei Dyleuski were sentenced in their absence to
lengthy prison sentences on trumped-up charges, while Nasta Loika was sent to prison for
seven years. In Kazakhstan, celebrated athlete Marat Zhylanbayev was sentenced to seven
years in prison for peaceful dissent. The US Department of State sanctioned four Georgian
judges for corruption for abusing their position and undermining the judicial system.
The UN expressed deep concern about the overly broad definition of terrorist organizations in
Tajikistan which made possible the application of emergency measures and restrictions on due
process. When Germany deported asylum seeker Abdullohi Shamsiddin to Tajikistan, he was

52

The State of the World’s Human Rights

forcibly disappeared before being sentenced to a seven-year term. In Uzbekistan dozens
connected to the 2022 mass protests in Karakalpakstan were convicted in unfair trials on
politically motivated charges.

CHILDREN’S AND OLDER PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
While Russia’s war in Ukraine created acute suffering and deprivation for all Ukrainians,
children and older people were made more vulnerable.
UN data in November indicated that at least 569 children killed and over 1,229 were injured
since February 2022. Estimated numbers of children unlawfully transferred by occupying
Russian authorities to Russian occupied territories or to Russia itself was in the hundreds and
possibly thousands. In March the ICC issued arrest warrants for President Vladimir Putin and
Children’s Rights Commissioner Maria Lvova-Belova for their role in this war crime.
Older people were disproportionately affected by the conflict, killed and injured at higher
rates than any other civilians. Those displaced struggled to access private housing
independently, and temporary shelters typically remained physically inaccessible for older
people, particularly those with disabilities.

ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL RIGHTS
Military conflict in the region continued to impact on economic and social rights. For nine
months until its offensive in September, Azerbaijan’s blockade of the Lachin corridor, a road
connecting Nagorno-Karabakh to Armenia, caused critical shortages of basic necessities
including food, medicines and fuel resulting in a humanitarian crisis in the breakaway region.
In September, in a serious attempt to unlawfully indoctrinate school children, high school
students across Russia as well as occupied territories of Ukraine were issued new “unified”
history textbooks which sought to whitewash the historical human rights record of Russian and
Soviet authorities. Children in Russian-occupied territories were forced to learn the Ukrainian
curriculum “in hiding”, to avoid reprisals.
Governments must ensure the rights of everyone to an adequate standard of living, and
access to quality education.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
People on the move continued to suffer across the region. Belarusian authorities violently
forced migrants across EU borders where they faced pushbacks, and in Russia authorities
used deception and pressure to recruit migrants into military service. The over 100,000 ethnic
Armenians displaced from Nagorno-Karabakh to Armenia faced economic hardship and
uncertainty about the prospects of return.
Governments must ensure all those fleeing persecution and human rights violations have
access to safety and international protection, and that no one is returned to face serious
human rights abuses.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
World War II-style military combat in Ukraine and countries who are major fossil fuel producers
and emitters in the region spurred vast environmental destruction and pollution.
Russia’s aggression in Ukraine produced severe air, water and land contamination, and
unmanageable quantities of hazardous waste. The Kakhovka dam was destroyed in what
appeared to be a deliberate military act widely believed to have been committed by Russian
forces, resulting in waste contamination with long lasting ecological consequences beyond
Ukraine’s borders.
Human health also suffered from air pollution, mainly from the burning of fossil fuels. Such
pollution was estimated to cause over 10,000 excess deaths annually in Kazakhstan, and 18%

The State of the World’s Human Rights

53

of deaths from stroke and ischaemic heart disease in Belarus. Kyrgyzstan’s capital was ranked
one of the most polluted in the world.
Across the region, those seeking to protect the environment themselves suffered severe
reprisals. Activists opposing a gold mining project in Armenia faced lawsuits seeking excessive
financial compensation for the supposed harm to business caused by their environmental
criticism. In Russia two major environmental NGOs were designated as “undesirable” and
banned from the country.
Governments must take immediate measures to protect individuals and communities
against the risks and impacts of climate change and extreme weather conditions, including
by seeking international assistance and cooperation to take sufficient climate adaptation
and mitigation measures.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In Ukraine, a draft law on civil partnerships, including for same-sex couples, was registered in
March, though it did not address the prohibition on child adoption by same-sex couples.
Russia, however, adopted new transphobic legislation and effectively outlawed any public
LGBTI people’s rights-related activity by labelling as “extremist” an undefined “international
public LGBT movement”. In Central Asia and beyond, gender rights were in retreat, with
Kyrgyzstan proposing legislative amendments to prohibit information that “denies family
values” and promotes “non-traditional sexual relationships”, while in Turkmenistan and
Uzbekistan consensual same-sex sexual relations remained a crime.
Governments should repeal laws, policies and practices that discriminate against LGBTI
people, including by decriminalizing consensual same-sex sexual relations and removing
legal obstacles to same-sex marriage.

WESTERN, CENTRAL AND SOUTH-EASTERN EUROPE
In 2023 politicians in many European countries fomented social polarization on women’s
and LGBTI rights, migration, climate justice, and the horrific events in Israel and the
Occupied Palestinian Territories (Israel/OPT). Many governments instrumentalized human
rights to stigmatize various groups and enacted disproportionate restrictions on civic space,
targeting climate protesters, people expressing dissenting views, particularly regarding
solidarity with Palestinians, Muslims and other racialized individuals.
Systemic racism continued to violate rights and cost lives. States maintained policies of
racialized exclusion towards people from Africa, the Middle East and Asia that resulted in
deaths and harm being inflicted on people at sea and land borders. Governments did little
to address the continued discrimination and segregation of Roma. The failure of states to
implement anti-racism measures and the political exploitation of racism formed the
backdrop to a spike in reports of antisemitism and anti-Muslim racism.
There was both progress and regression on gender-based violence and sexual and
reproductive rights. The slide to surveillance societies continued. The most vulnerable,
including people with disabilities, suffered inadequate social protection.
Double standards were evident in the rhetoric and policies of many states: towards Israel
versus the simultaneous restrictions imposed on solidarity for Palestinian human rights;
warm words at COP28 while continuing the use and production of fossil fuels and cracking
down on protesters; and the complacency towards human rights backsliding within Europe
but criticism of states outside the region.

54

The State of the World’s Human Rights

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
EU member states maintained deadly policies of racialized exclusion and externalization, and
made little progress on responsibility-sharing within the EU. Negotiations on EU asylum
reforms pointed to a compromise that would reduce safeguards and increase suffering for
people seeking safety. States failed to establish safe and legal routes, instead subjecting
people to abuse and unnecessary danger at land and sea borders. More than 600 racialized
people including children died in a shipwreck off Pylos in Greece in one such incident alone,
and hundreds of others from Africa, the Middle East and Asia were subjected to abuse and
violence throughout the year as unlawful, summary forced returns remained a daily
occurrence at borders across Europe.
The European Commission failed to trigger infringement proceedings against Latvia and
Lithuania after they introduced the possibility of summary returns into domestic legislation.
Impunity for violations at borders persisted: Spain failed to investigate effectively the 2022
deaths, torture and unlawful expulsions between Melilla and Morocco.
Some European countries failed to ensure the rights of Afghans to seek safety. In Germany, a
humanitarian admission programme meant to admit 1,000 Afghan people per month
benefited less than 100. Denmark, Finland and Sweden took positive steps to grant prima
facie recognition of refugee status to Afghan women and girls.
Refugees and migrants faced attacks in the Czech Republic, Cyprus, Germany and Greece.
Many politicians engaged in discriminatory and racist rhetoric which targeted refugee and
migrant communities, including in Türkiye in the context of elections.
European states continued to externalize border control, disregarding human rights. More
countries sought agreements on offshore processing of asylum seekers, such as Italy with
Albania, while advancing an EU deal with Tunisia that risked rights violations. Cooperation with
Türkiye, where thousands of people were subjected to refoulement, continued. Despite losing
legal challenges, the UK government seemed intent on implementing its plan to transfer
asylum seekers to Rwanda for processing of their asylum applications.
Governments must put an end to policies of racialized exclusion. They must
instead ensure that policies and practices protect, respect and fulfil the right to life of
refugees and migrants, establish safe and legal routes and uphold people’s right to asylum
at borders.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Latvia ratified the Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against
women and domestic violence, while North Macedonia harmonized its laws with the treaty.
Croatia announced that femicide would be a separate offence. Switzerland adopted a consentbased definition of rape and the Netherlands marked progress towards adopting such a
definition.
Many countries, however, reported high figures for gender-based violence against women
and girls against a backdrop of inadequate state actions to tackle it. Monitors in Albania,
Austria, Greece, Italy, Serbia, Spain and Türkiye each reported dozens, if not hundreds, of
femicides. The live-streaming of a killing in Bosnia and Herzegovina sparked protests, as did
the mild punishment of a perpetrator in Bulgaria.
While a law in Finland entered into force allowing abortion on request in the first 12 weeks of
pregnancy, and Spain passed a bill to allow abortions for 16-17-year-olds without parental
consent, several countries retained restrictions on abortion. In Poland at least one woman died
as a consequence of being denied abortion services. In Croatia, Ireland, Italy and Northern
Ireland, health personnel frequently invoked conscience clauses. Some Austrian regions
excluded abortion from the health system, while the Czech Republic saw care refused to non-

The State of the World’s Human Rights

55

Czech EU citizens. Legislation banning abortion in Malta was amended but access remained
highly restricted. Andorra was the only country with a total ban.
Governments must urgently combat all forms of gender-based violence and address their
root causes.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
Several cities and cantons in Switzerland adopted bans on facial recognition in public spaces.
In France, however, a new law authorized mass biometric surveillance for the 2024 Olympics.
Amnesty International revealed that the Intellexa Alliance of companies traded Predator
spyware to many countries, including Austria, Switzerland, and Germany, and uncovered
Predator use against a Berlin news site, European institutions, and researchers. In Spain, at
least 65 people, mostly in Catalonia, were targeted by Pegasus spyware.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL AND EROSION OF JUDICIAL INDEPENDENCE
Hungary, Poland and Türkiye continued to undermine judicial independence. Hungary took
steps to limit the powers of the judiciary. In Poland, the government targeted critical judges. In
Türkiye, the Court of Cassation refused to implement a Constitutional Court ruling, accusing its
judges of overreach.
Governments must stop the slide to surveillance societies, respect the right to a fair trial,
and end the erosion of judicial independence.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Attacks against journalists were recorded in countries across the region. Türkiye continued to
arrest or detain many journalists for bogus terrorism-related offences.
Politicians and businesses used strategic litigation against public participation (SLAPP) suits
to silence journalists or activists in Austria, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, North Macedonia and
Serbia. While Republika Srpska in Bosnia and Herzegovina criminalized defamation, Bulgaria
reduced fines for defamation against public officials and Croatia adopted a plan envisaging
the early dismissal of SLAPPs.
With few exceptions, states across the region proposed or adopted measures to
disproportionately restrict views, including online, critical of Israel’s bombing campaign in Gaza
and in support of Palestinian human rights.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
As the climate emergency deepened, peaceful protests increased, prompting harsh responses
by authorities. Climate protesters engaging in peaceful acts of civil disobedience faced mass
arrests, prosecution for harsh crimes and smear campaigns.
Many countries enacted disproportionate restrictions on assemblies. In the Netherlands,
police used unlawful ID checks as a surveillance tool against protesters. In France, Italy, Serbia
and Türkiye, among others, law enforcement often engaged in unlawful use of force as well as
discriminatory policing.
Many governments imposed unlawful restrictions on protests in solidarity with Palestinians.
Austria, France, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Switzerland and others pre-emptively banned
such protests, citing vague risks to public order or national security. Media and politicians
frequently used rhetoric that dehumanized Palestinians, spread racist stereotypes and
conflated Muslims with terrorists.
France invoked counterterrorism legislation to ban peaceful protests and carried out arbitrary
arrests. During the Prides, Turkish police implemented blanket bans, used unnecessary force,
and arrested 224 people. The UK passed a bill expanding police powers, creating protest
banning orders and allowing civil injunctions.

56

The State of the World’s Human Rights

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
France continued to pursue the dissolution of several NGOs without due process. Türkiye
intensified the use of intrusive NGO audits. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, Republika Srpska
passed a law creating a registry of foreign-funded NGOs. In Hungary the government
introduced a new law to limit foreign funding for NGOs.
The space for all to exercise the rights to freedom of expression, association and peaceful
assembly must be protected from state overreach.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders working on women’s or migrants’ rights were frequent targets of
repression. In Andorra, an activist faced steep fines after speaking out against the abortion
ban. In Poland, Justyna Wydrzynska received eight months of community service for assisting
a woman to access abortion pills. In Greece, migrants’ rights defenders Sarah Mardini and
Séan Binder were indicted for four felonies. Latvian authorities opened criminal proceedings
against two defenders for humanitarian work at the Belarus border. Türkiye upheld the
conviction of Osman Kavala, defying judgments of the European Court of Human Rights
(ECtHR).
Governments should protect human rights defenders and recognize their crucial role,
rather than stigmatizing and criminalizing their activities.

RACIAL DISCRIMINATION
Racial profiling by law enforcement remained common. The French Council of State
acknowledged discriminatory police checks but proposed no action. The Netherlands border
police were found guilty of racial profiling. In the UK, a report flagged institutional
discrimination in London’s Metropolitan Police.
Germany reported record rates of hate crimes. The ECtHR again condemned Bosnia and
Herzegovina for discriminatory electoral rules. In Latvia and Lithuania, some citizens of Russia
faced the loss of residence permits.
Roma faced discrimination, segregation and social exclusion. The European Committee on
Social Rights found Italy had violated Roma housing rights, while courts in Slovakia found that
segregated classes for Roma pupils were discriminatory. The Bulgarian equality body
investigated denial of entry for Roma to swimming pools. In North Macedonia, a Roma man
died after being denied treatment due to the lack of an ID card; in Romania, a pregnant deaf
Roma woman was denied medical care at a hospital and gave birth on the pavement.
In France, Muslim women were especially targeted for restrictions in sport and education.
Antisemitic and anti-Muslim discriminatory speech and hate crimes spiked across the region
as horrific events unfolded in Israel/OPT.
In the aftermath of the February earthquakes in Türkiye, civilians and state actors targeted
migrants and refugees helping search and rescue with racist abuse.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Latvia recognized civil partnerships, while Lithuania failed to do so. The ECtHR condemned
Bulgaria and Romania for failing to recognize same-sex couples.
Discrimination persisted against LGBTI people. In Croatia and North Macedonia, Prides faced
threats and discriminatory speech from both public officials and private individuals. Norwegian
police found LGBTI meeting places to be at ongoing risk of violent attacks. In Türkiye,
politicians used discriminatory rhetoric against LGBTI people.
Although Hungary faced legal action in the Court of Justice of the EU for its propaganda law,
the authorities fined a bookstore for violating this legislation and the Media Council barred a TV

The State of the World’s Human Rights

57

advertisement on Pride. The ECtHR condemned Lithuania for censorship of a book depicting
same-sex relationships.
Transgender rights saw progress and setbacks. Germany abolished the discriminatory
exclusion of transgender people, gay and bisexual men from blood donations. A new SelfDetermination Act was discussed in parliament, which would enable self-determination for
transgender, non-binary and intersex people on the basis of a simple declaration at the registry
office. In Finland such recognition became available to adults upon application. In Spain a
new law guaranteed access to health services and gender self-determination. However,
Bulgaria ended legal gender recognition for transgender people and the UK government
blocked the Scottish Gender Recognition Reform Act.
Governments should meaningfully address systemic discrimination including against
Jewish people, Muslim people, Black people, Roma and LGBTI people.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS
In Finland, the government announced plans to cut public healthcare and raise user fees and
taxes on medicines, which will disproportionately affect the most vulnerable. The European
Social Committee deemed admissible a complaint against Greece regarding austerity cuts to
healthcare. Slovenia passed a Long-Term Care Act, but faced a shortage of doctors.
Denmark and Finland announced cuts to social assistance. France, Ireland and Portugal had
record levels of homelessness. Spain adopted a housing rights law, but failed to protect
economically vulnerable people from evictions. In Serbia, the new semi-automated social
welfare system resulted in possibly thousands of people losing access to vital social assistance
and disproportionately affected Roma and people with disabilities.
The response of the Turkish government after the February earthquakes was inadequate in
protecting people with disabilities.
Governments must take immediate action to guarantee all people’s economic and social
rights, free from discrimination, including by assigning adequate resources and ensuring
universal and comprehensive social protection.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In positive moves a Cyprus court recognized an environmental NGO’s right to file public
interest claims, NGOs in Ireland litigated against the failure to sufficiently reduce greenhouse
gas emissions, and young people in Portugal brought a case against 33 countries at the ECtHR
for insufficient action on climate change. The Council of Europe recognized politically the right
to a healthy environment, but failed to adopt a binding legal instrument on this right.
Many countries, however, continued fossil fuel use. Bulgaria and Romania planned gas
exploration in the Black Sea, Greece and Slovakia planned LNG terminals, Malta supported a
major gas pipeline, Norway provided tax incentives for oil and gas fields and Germany
approved finance for fossil fuel projects. French banks were among the biggest funders of
fossil fuel extraction.
Governments should phase out the use and production of fossil fuel through a just
transition. They should also urgently scale up climate finance to lower-income countries
and commit to providing additional dedicated funding for loss and damage.

58

The State of the World’s Human Rights

MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
REGIONAL OVERVIEW
The devastating escalation of violence in the Israel-Palestine conflict had profound
ramifications across the region, and worldwide. From October, Israeli forces killed more
than 21,000 Gazans, mostly civilians, many unlawfully, while Hamas deliberately killed
civilians in Israel and held hostages and captives. The conflict’s deep roots lie in Israel’s
forced displacement and dispossession of Palestinians in 1948, the military occupation of
Gaza and the West Bank in 1967, Israel’s ongoing system of apartheid against
Palestinians, and its 16-year illegal blockade of the occupied Gaza Strip.
The impacts of other long-standing conflicts in Iraq, Libya, Syria and Yemen continued to
blight the lives of millions of people, particularly those from marginalized communities,
including internally displaced people, refugees and migrants, and ethnic minorities, many
of whom were denied the most basic rights to food, water, adequate housing, healthcare
and security. Indiscriminate attacks, destruction of infrastructure, forced displacement and
abusive rule by security forces, militias and armed groups continued with impunity.
Regional governments failed to respond adequately to the impacts of sharp cost of living
rises, economic crises and natural and climate change-linked disasters, all affecting the
fundamental human rights of hundreds of millions of people. People expressing their
political, social and economic grievances faced punitive measures intended to silence
dissent. Authorities detained, tortured and unjustly prosecuted dissidents and critics,
punishing them with harsh sentences, including the death penalty, travel bans, threats and
other forms of harassment. Those targeted included journalists, online commentators,
human rights defenders – including campaigners for the rights of women, LGBTI people
and marginalized communities – political and trade union activists. In Egypt, Iran and
Jordan, security forces used unlawful, sometimes lethal, force alongside enforced
disappearances and mass arbitrary arrests to suppress protests. Most perpetrators of such
human rights violations enjoyed impunity for their crimes.
Discrimination remained rife across the region on the basis of gender, race, nationality,
legal status, ethnicity, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, religion and
economic class. In some countries it was entrenched in law.
Although extreme weather events like drought and intense heat brought death and
destruction to parts of the region, governments failed to take the necessary action to tackle
climate change and environmental degradation; several announced plans to expand fossil
fuel production, including Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, which hosted
COP28.

ISRAEL-PALESTINE CONFLICT
In October, the long-standing Israel-Palestine conflict exploded and the aftershocks for
regional politics and international human rights law rippled across the region, and globally.
On 7 October, Hamas and other Palestinian armed groups committed war crimes, including
deliberately killing hundreds of civilians in Israel, hostage-taking, and firing indiscriminate
rockets into Israel. Subsequently, Israeli forces carried out heavy air bombardments of the
densely populated Gaza Strip, committing war crimes including by killing and injuring civilians
and destroying and damaging homes and other civilian objects in indiscriminate and other

The State of the World’s Human Rights

59

unlawful attacks, unlawfully imposing a total siege on the already impoverished civilian
population, and forcibly displacing nearly 1.9 million Palestinians from their homes.
Over the following 12 weeks, Israeli forces’ relentless bombardment and ground offensive
killed 21,600 Palestinians, according to Gaza’s health ministry, a third of whom were children,
injured many others, and flattened much of Gaza’s built-up areas. Mounting evidence,
supported by multiple testimonies, satellite imagery and verified photos and videos gathered
by Amnesty International and others, showed how Israeli forces bombed crowded refugee
camps and residential buildings, repeatedly wiping out entire families and destroying hospitals,
churches, mosques, UN-run schools, bakeries, roads and other crucial infrastructure. Israel’s
vague warnings to “evacuate” northern Gaza, even as they continued to bombard supposedly
safe areas in the south, amounted to forced displacement of the civilian population, in violation
of international humanitarian law.
Thousands of other Palestinians died needlessly as a consequence of Israel’s blockade and
attacks on hospitals, which left 2.2 million Gazans without access to adequate drinking water,
food, medical supplies and fuel, and the virtual collapse of the health system.
As international attention focused on Gaza, violent attacks on Palestinians in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, by Israeli armed forces and state-backed armed Jewish
settlers intensified, killing 511 and forcing thousands to flee their homes. Such attacks were
carried out with impunity. Israeli authorities also demolished hundreds of Palestinian buildings
without military justification, displacing 2,249 people, and significantly increased their use of
administrative detention.

INTERNATIONAL RESPONSE
Despite the staggering levels of civilian bloodshed, destruction and suffering in Gaza and
Israel, the international community failed to act meaningfully with some states, particularly the
USA, continuing to arm parties to the conflict with weapons used in flagrant violations of
human rights. The USA used its veto power to block the UN Security Council from taking
effective action or for calling for a ceasefire.
Powerful nations, including the USA and many western European states, publicly backed
Israel’s actions, undermining respect for international humanitarian law and protection of
civilians. The international community’s unwillingness to uphold human rights and
international humanitarian law emboldened Israel to continue carrying out its military offensive
without regard for its devastating toll on civilians in Gaza.
On 16 November, a group of UN experts publicly warned that the world was witnessing “a
genocide in the making” in Gaza.
In contrast to the international community’s lack of meaningful response, hundreds of
millions of people worldwide staged mass weekly demonstrations in solidarity with Gazans and
to demand a ceasefire and an end to the blockade.
Such demonstrations also swept the region, including in countries that had normalized
relations with Israel and where public protests were forbidden or dangerous. In Egypt, tens of
thousands took to the streets nationwide with the authorities arbitrarily arresting dozens. In
Bahrain, around 1,000 people demonstrated. Large demonstrations were also held in Algeria,
Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Syria, Tunisia and Yemen as well as in the West
Bank.
On 11 November, at an unprecedented joint summit of the Arab League and the Organisation
of Islamic Cooperation, leaders condemned Israeli aggression against the Gaza Strip, the war
crimes and the “barbaric ... and inhuman massacres” perpetrated by the government of
occupation. In December, South Africa applied to the International Court of Justice for
proceedings to be initiated against Israel regarding its breaches of the 1948 Genocide
Convention in Gaza.

60

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Meanwhile, concerns about the conflict spreading grew. From 7 October, cross-border
hostilities between Israel and Hizbullah and other armed groups in south Lebanon resulted in
at least four Israeli civilian deaths and at least 20 civilian deaths in Lebanon. Between 10 and
16 October, Israeli forces fired artillery shells containing white phosphorus in military
operations along Lebanon’s southern border. Amnesty International called for the attack on
Dhayra to be investigated as a possible war crime. On 13 October, Israeli artillery fire in
southern Lebanon killed a journalist and injured six others. The same month, Israeli strikes in
Syria killed eight soldiers and hit Aleppo airport four times. Since 9 October, the Israeli military
struck the Rafah border crossing with Egypt numerous times, on one occasion injuring
Egyptian border guards.
Globally, online hatred and racism against Palestinian and Jewish communities escalated,
including incitement to violence, hostility and discrimination, and some governments
repressed the rights to freedom of expression and assembly to stifle pro-Palestinian
demonstrations and slogans.
Under international humanitarian law, all sides in a conflict must protect civilians and
civilian objects. Amnesty International calls for an immediate ceasefire to prevent further
loss of civilian lives, to allow life-saving humanitarian aid to reach those in desperate need
in Gaza, and for independent international investigations into crimes under international
law committed by all parties. It calls for the immediate release of all civilian hostages held
by Hamas, and of all Palestinians arbitrarily detained by Israel. The international
community should impose a comprehensive arms embargo on all parties to the conflict.

OTHER VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
Other long-standing regional armed conflicts and their aftermaths devastated the lives of
millions of people, with parties to the conflicts – some backed by foreign governments –
committing war crimes and other serious violations of international humanitarian law.
In the 12th year of the conflict in Syria, all parties and their allies carried out unlawful attacks,
killing civilians and destroying vital infrastructure. The Syrian government, supported by
Russian government forces, launched multiple unlawful ground attacks and from October
escalated aerial attacks on civilians and civilian objects in north-west Syria, killing dozens of
civilians and displacing tens of thousands.
In Libya, militias and armed groups carried out unlawful attacks and used weapons with wide
area effects in residential neighbourhoods, killing and wounding civilians and destroying
civilian infrastructure during armed hostilities. Thousands remained arbitrarily detained in
relation to the conflict or for their tribal or political affiliations. In Yemen, despite a decline in
armed conflict and cross-border attacks, all parties to the conflict committed unlawful attacks
and killings with impunity.
All parties to armed conflicts must respect international humanitarian law, in particular
ending direct attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure, and indiscriminate attacks.
Foreign governments must stop transfers of weapons where there is an overriding risk of
their use to commit or facilitate serious violations of human rights or international
humanitarian law.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

61

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
Across the region, authorities continued to violate the rights of people who expressed critical or
dissenting views, including online, whether about their government or security forces, human
rights, economic policies, international affairs or social issues deemed “immoral”.
In the aftermath of Iran’s “Woman Life Freedom” uprising in 2022, authorities intensified
their crackdown on women and girls defying compulsory veiling, and the harassment of
relatives of unlawfully killed protesters and bystanders seeking truth and justice. They also
arrested scores of journalists, lawyers and human rights defenders. The authorities disrupted
internet and mobile phone networks during protests, prevented mass nationwide
demonstrations on the anniversary in September, of the 2022 uprising, by carrying out arrests,
and crushed smaller local protests using unlawful force and mass arrests.
Ahead of Egypt’s December presidential elections, in which genuine opposition candidates
were barred from running, the authorities intensified their targeting of opposition politicians
and their supporters; relatives of dissidents abroad; trade unionists; lawyers; journalists; and
people critical of the authorities’ human rights record and their handling of the economic
crisis, and the military’s role. Security forces continued to forcibly disappear, torture, unjustly
prosecute and arbitrarily detain dissidents.
Some states used terrorism legislation or bogus charges to silence opposition and inflict
harsh punishments on their critics.
In Algeria, authorities prosecuted activists and journalists for expressing critical views, mainly
online, and shut down media outlets. Iraqi authorities attacked the right to freedom of
expression and attempted to introduce laws and regulations to curb this right.
In Tunisia, authorities escalated their crackdown on dissent, increasingly using unfounded
conspiracy and terrorism charges against high-profile opposition figures and other critics, and
frequently using a new draconian cybercrime law. Members of the Ennahda opposition party
were particularly targeted, with many of its leaders held in long-term pretrial detention. Over 50
political activists were investigated under trumped-up charges of “conspiracy,” while dozens of
social and environmental protesters were unjustly prosecuted.
In Saudi Arabia, the authorities relentlessly targeted perceived dissidents. The Specialized
Criminal Court (SCC), established to try terror-related crimes, sentenced individuals to lengthy
prison terms following grossly unfair trials for exercising their rights to freedom of expression or
association, including peaceful online speech. The SCC appeals court upheld Salma alShehab’s conviction for terrorism-related offences, including publishing tweets that “disturb
public order, destabilize the security of society and the… state” for her social media posts
supporting women’s rights. She was sentenced to 27 years in prison followed by a 27-year
travel ban.
During the annual climate change conference (COP28), hosted by the United Arab Emirates
(UAE), a mass trial began of over 80 Emiratis, including human rights defenders and prisoners
of conscience already imprisoned for a decade, on trumped-up terrorism charges. At least 26
prisoners of conscience remained held in the UAE for the peaceful expression of their beliefs.
Apart from pro-Palestine marches, the enduring or intensified repression across much of the
region impeded mass protests, and the few that went ahead were usually met with unlawful
use of force and arrests.
Hundreds of thousands of Israelis demonstrated against proposed judicial reforms and were
occasionally met with arbitrary arrests and police use of excessive force. Meanwhile, Israel’s
Military Order 101 continued to suppress Palestinians’ right to peacefully protest and assemble
in the West Bank.
In Jordan, the authorities increasingly stifled the peaceful activities of political activists,
journalists, workers, political party members, LGBTI people and others under abusive and

62

The State of the World’s Human Rights

vaguely defined laws. A new cybercrime law further repressed individuals’ right to express their
opinions online. At least 43 individuals were investigated or prosecuted for online expression,
under abusive and vague laws. Nine were tried by the military State Security Court.
Governments must respect the rights to freedom of expression, association and peaceful
assembly, including by ensuring that journalists, human rights defenders and activists can
enjoy these rights without harassment, violence and prosecution, and releasing those
detained for exercising these rights.

DENIAL OF ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL RIGHTS
Rising inflation, government failings and other factors – locally, regionally and internationally –
continued to put intense pressure on energy and food prices across the region, hitting hardest
the least resource-rich and most populous countries, some of which were still recovering from
the Covid-19 pandemic’s economic and other impacts. This left millions of people food
insecure, and undermined their rights to water, health and an adequate standard of living.
Worst affected were people who experienced multiple forms of discrimination including
women, low-paid workers, refugees, migrants and internally displaced people.
In Lebanon, the economic crisis deepened, with inflation hitting triple digits and food price
inflation reaching over 300%. Many people, particularly those from marginalized groups, could
not afford or access medication and other essentials, including potable water, sufficient food,
power and other basic goods and vital services. Egypt’s economic crisis had shattering impacts
on socio-economic rights. The government allocated about half of the budget to debt
repayment while failing to meet its budgetary obligations for spending on health and
education, or adequately adjusting its social protection programmes. Combined with rising
inflation, this pushed millions more into poverty.
In many countries, including those with burgeoning oil- and gas-rich economies,
governments failed to protect low-paid workers from labour abuses, and denied workers the
right to join independent trade unions and to strike. In the Gulf states, low-paid migrant
workers continued to face extreme exploitation, discrimination, grossly inadequate housing,
physical and mental abuses, wage theft by their employers and limited access to healthcare.
In Qatar, despite the high-profile campaigning on migrant workers’ rights in connection with
football’s 2022 World Cup staged there, migrant workers faced abuses, including wage theft,
forced labour and restrictions on changing jobs, and had inadequate access to grievance and
redress mechanisms. The low minimum wage prevented workers from having an adequate
standard of living or freeing themselves from debt bondage caused by paying illegal
recruitment fees. In Qatar and some other states, domestic workers, mostly women, faced
harsh working conditions and a high risk of physical and mental abuse, including sexual
assault.
Dozens of Nepali migrant workers contracted to work in Amazon warehouses in Saudi Arabia
suffered human rights abuses, including treatment that may amount to human trafficking for
the purposes of labour exploitation. They were deceived about their jobs, had wages withheld
and were housed in appalling accommodation. Some were verbally or physically abused,
particularly when they complained about their conditions.
Governments must take urgent action to establish social protection measures that protect
everyone, including marginalized groups, against the adverse impacts of crises, and call for
coordinated international efforts to guarantee the rights to health, food and an adequate
standard of living. Governments must protect the right of workers to organize independent
trade unions and to protest, and extend labour law protections to migrant workers.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

63

DISCRIMINATION
WOMEN AND GIRLS
Across the region, women and girls faced discrimination in law and practice, including in
relation to the rights to freedom of movement, expression, bodily autonomy, inheritance,
divorce, political office and employment opportunities. Gender-based violence remained
common and perpetrators enjoyed impunity. In some countries, such violence increased and
protections for women weakened. In Algeria and Iraq, the law allows rapists to escape
prosecution by marrying their victim. Morocco rejected UPR recommendations to criminalize
marital rape. “Honour killings” of women and other femicides continued including in Algeria
and Tunisia.
In the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, the regional government allowed perpetrators of domestic
violence to escape prosecution and failed to adequately protect survivors.
In Iran, authorities intensified their crackdown on women and girls who defied compulsory
veiling by introducing new policies severely violating their social, economic, cultural, civil and
political rights. Punitive measures included sending 1 million SMS warnings to women
threatening the confiscation of their vehicles and referring thousands to the judiciary.
In Yemen, the Huthi de facto authorities and armed groups imposed restrictions on women’s
movement and banned them from travelling without a male guardian or their guardian’s written
approval. In Egypt, the authorities failed to adequately prevent sexual and gender-based
violence by state and non-state actors, amid increased reports of women killed by family
members or rejected suitors. Meanwhile, women were prosecuted for speaking out against
sexual violence or on “morality” grounds.

LGBTI PEOPLE
People across the region were arrested and prosecuted for their sexual orientation or gender
identity, and many were given harsh sentences if convicted of consensual same-sex sexual
relations. Attacks on the rights of LGBTI people intensified in Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya and
Tunisia. In Lebanon, authorities incited violence against gay and lesbian people. In response,
18 media organizations jointly condemned the crackdown on freedoms; and a coalition of 15
Lebanese and international organizations urged Lebanon to scrap proposed anti-LGBTI laws.
In Libya, the Internal Security Agency in Tripoli and other militias and armed groups arbitrarily
arrested individuals for their actual or perceived sexual orientation and/or gender identity, and
aired their torture-tainted “confessions”. Iraqi authorities ordered media to replace the term
“homosexuality” with “sexual deviance”. In Tunisia, courts handed down two-year prison
sentences under provisions that criminalize consensual same-sex sexual relations. In Jordan,
some parliamentarians spearheaded an anti-LGBTI campaign, calling for same-sex
sexual relations to be criminalized, triggering hate speech and threats against LGBTI
individuals and supporters.

RACIAL, ETHNIC, NATIONAL AND RELIGIOUS COMMUNITIES
Across the region, members of racial, ethnic, national and religious communities and
minorities faced discrimination in law and practice, including in relation to their rights to
worship, enjoy equal access to employment and healthcare, and live free of persecution and
other serious human rights abuses.
Israel continued to entrench its extreme form of discrimination – a system of apartheid – via
oppression and domination over Palestinians through territorial fragmentation, segregation and
control, dispossession of land and property, and denial of economic and social rights. This was
achieved by the systematic commission of a wide range of human rights violations, including

64

The State of the World’s Human Rights

forcible transfer, administrative detention, torture, unlawful killings, denial of basic rights and
freedoms, and persecution.
In Iran, ethnic minorities, including Ahwazi Arabs, Azerbaijani Turks, Baluchis, Kurds and
Turkmen, faced discrimination, restricting their access to education, employment, adequate
housing and political office. Christians, Gonabadi Dervishes, Jews, Yaresan and Sunni Muslims
also faced discrimination in law and practice. The Baha’i minority was particularly subjected to
widespread and systematic violations.
Discriminatory law in Kuwait denied the Bidun (a native stateless population) access to free
state services, including education, provided to citizens. In Egypt, authorities arrested and
prosecuted members of religious minorities, and people espousing beliefs not sanctioned by
the state. In Libya, Tabu and Tuareg communities, denied national identity cards due to
discrimination, struggled to access basic services, amid rising racism and xenophobia.
Governments must take urgent action to end gender-based discrimination and violence
against women and girls, and LGBTI people and bring to justice those responsible for such
crimes. They must also decriminalize consensual same-sex sexual relations. Governments
must end discrimination based on race, national origin, ethnicity, religion, gender, sexual
orientation and gender identity and expression and implement legal and policy reforms to
grant equal rights for all without discrimination and to protect, promote and guarantee the
right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion and belief.

RIGHTS OF INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE, MIGRANTS
AND REFUGEES
Protracted conflicts in Iraq, Libya, Syria and Yemen left vast numbers of internally displaced
people struggling to survive. Most faced barriers to accessing services, discrimination, blocks
on their right to return home or reprisals if they tried to return without authorization, and
restrictions and cuts to vital humanitarian aid.
In Iraq, at least 1.1 million people remained internally displaced as a result of the conflict
with the armed group Islamic State, with the majority remaining in precarious situations almost
six years after the conflict. In April, Iraqi authorities closed, without warning or coordination
with humanitarian actors, the last operating internally displaced people’s camp.
In Syria, around 2.9 million internally displaced people in the north-west continued to rely on
UN-coordinated humanitarian assistance, and in 2023, at least 118,000 more people were
displaced by armed clashes. The Syrian government restricted essential supplies from
reaching civilians, including many internally displaced people, who lived in predominantly
Kurdish areas in the northern Aleppo region, and already faced severe shortages of fuel and
aid.
Natural disasters, the impacts of which were exacerbated by government mismanagement,
impunity and the rule of militias, compounded the problems of displaced people and added
hundreds of thousands to their ranks. Earthquakes in south-eastern Türkiye and northern Syria
on 6 February displaced around 400,000 families in Syria and left nearly 9 million people in
need of immediate humanitarian support. Many families lost their homes and were forced to
live in temporary shelters and camps. The earthquakes also increased the humanitarian needs
of all those previously displaced in north-west Syria, including the growing number living in
tents with limited or no access to water, sanitation and healthcare.
Migrants’ and refugees’ rights took a battering across the region. In Lebanon, host to an
estimated 1.5 million Syrian – and more than 200,000 other refugees – the government’s
failure to mitigate the impacts of the country’s economic crisis left around 90% of Syrian
refugees in extreme poverty, without access to adequate food and basic services. Increasing

The State of the World’s Human Rights

65

anti-refugee rhetoric, sometimes fuelled by local authorities and politicians, intensified the
hostile environment for refugees. In April and May, Lebanese armed forces raided Syrian
refugees’ houses, deporting most of them; in September they raided refugee camps in the
Bekaa region and Arsal town and confiscated property. In Jordan, 2 million Palestinian and
approximately 750,000 other refugees faced poverty and deteriorating conditions, partly due to
international aid cuts.
From July, Tunisian authorities forcibly expelled thousands of Black migrants, asylum seekers
and refugees, including children, to the desert along the Libyan and Algerian borders, leaving
them without food or water, resulting in at least 28 deaths. The authorities, including President
Saied, instigated an unprecedented level of racist violence against Black migrants. Police used
tear gas against migrants, asylum seekers and refugees staging a sit-in outside UN offices in
Tunis and tortured protesters in custody. In Libya, refugees and migrants, including those
intercepted at sea by EU-backed coastguards and armed groups and forcibly returned to
Libya, were subjected to indefinite arbitrary detention, torture and other ill-treatment, extortion
and forced labour; and over 22,000 were forcibly and summarily expelled towards Chad,
Egypt, Niger and Sudan.
Saudi Arabia forcibly returned to their home countries hundreds of thousands of people in a
crackdown on undocumented migrants. In Iran, the estimated 5 million Afghan nationals living
there faced deep-rooted discrimination, including barriers to basic services. Authorities
threatened to deport Afghans who entered Iran irregularly and prohibited Afghans from living
and/or working in some provinces.
Governments must take concrete steps to ensure the voluntary, safe and dignified return
of internally displaced people to their areas of origin. They must also end the arbitrary
detention of refugees and migrants on the basis of their migration status, and protect them
from torture and other ill-treatment in detention, refoulement and mass expulsions.

DEATH PENALTY
Most states retained the death penalty and some handed down death sentences, including for
offences or acts protected under international law such as consensual same-sex sexual
relations and apostasy, and for bogus or overly broad charges brought to silence dissent.
Executions were carried out in Egypt, Iran, Iraq and Saudi Arabia. In Egypt, the number of
executions fell, but in Iran it rose, and in Libya there were threats to resume executions halted
since 2011. A Saudi Arabian court handed down for the first time a death sentence imposed
for social media activity.
Governments must immediately establish an official moratorium on executions with a view
to abolishing the death penalty.

CLIMATE CRISIS
2023 exposed the terrible consequences of climate change regionally, including water
shortages and extreme weather conditions that increasingly affected vulnerable areas and
populations, and revealed the poor preparedness of many countries for such impacts.
Storm Daniel triggered the collapse of two poorly maintained dams in Libya’s Derna city.
Resulting torrents left 4,540 people dead, 8,500 missing and over 44,000 displaced.
Unprecedented heatwaves in Algeria, triggered at least 140 fires that killed some 34 people
and displaced 1,500. Record high temperatures were recorded in Morocco, reaching over
50°C in Agadir. Iraq and Syria faced sustained drought.
Meanwhile, regional states generally maintained a business-as-usual approach to fossil fuel
production, contributing to the likelihood of an overshoot of the target to keep global warming

66

The State of the World’s Human Rights

to below 1.5°C, and failed to respond adequately to environmental degradation. Iraq reported
record revenues from oil sales and announced plans to drill new wells and increase oil
production. Saudi Arabia announced plans to increase its output by about 1 million barrels a
day by 2027 and increase by 50% its production of natural gas by 2030. It continued to play a
spoiler role in international negotiations on the phase out of fossil fuels, blocking a G20
initiative to reduce the use of fossil fuels, and was one of the strongest opponents of including
fossil fuel phase out in the COP28 decision. Kuwait retained plans to increase fossil fuel
production until at least 2035, with the state-owned Kuwait Oil Company announcing in June
that it would spend over USD 40 billion by 2028 to expand oil production. Qatar expanded its
production of liquefied natural gas. However, Oman launched a programme to reduce carbon
emissions, focusing on carbon neutrality goals for 2030, 2040 and 2050, although it continued
to rely on and produce non-renewable sources of energy.
The choice of UAE as the COP28 host proved controversial not least because the stateowned Abu Dhabi National Oil Company, one of the world’s largest producers of hydrocarbons
which is headed by COP28 president Sultan Al Jaber, had announced plans to aggressively
expand its fossil fuel production.
In December, at COP28, states agreed, for the first time, a decision that mentioned fossil
fuels, but fell far short of what was needed, including by leaving loopholes allowing fossil fuel
producers and states to continue with their current approach. States, including those most
responsible for the climate crisis, also failed to provide adequate commitments on funding,
either for climate finance to help other states transition to clean energy or to adapt to the
harmful impacts of the climate crisis, and offered barely enough to operationalize the new Loss
and Damage Fund.
Governments must urgently take steps to mitigate the climate crisis, and to keep global
warming to within the limit of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, including by curbing their
carbon emissions (particularly those most responsible for historical emissions), and ending
the funding of fossil fuel extraction. All states with the necessary resources should
significantly increase funding to countries in need of assistance for human rightsconsistent mitigation and adaptation measures.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment continued in official and unofficial places of detention, with
rampant levels in Egypt, Iran, Libya, Saudi Arabia and Syria that sometimes led to deaths in
custody with impunity; and continuing reports emerging of its use from Algeria, Iraq, Israel and
the Occupied Palestinian Territories, Lebanon, Morocco, Palestine (State of) and the UAE.
Torture was often used to extract “confessions” and methods included beatings, electric
shocks, mock executions, suspension in contorted positions, rape and other sexual violence,
denial of healthcare and prolonged solitary confinement.
In Egypt, torture and other ill-treatment remained routine in prisons, police stations and
National Security Agency-run facilities, and included deliberate denial of healthcare, prolonged
solitary confinement, bombardment with bright lights, constant camera surveillance, and
denial of family visits. In Iran and Libya, it remained widespread and systematic, with filmed
“confessions” extracted under torture broadcast publicly. In almost all cases documented
across the region, authorities failed to adequately investigate torture allegations and suspicious
deaths in custody. Whistle-blower Mohamed Benhlima told an Algerian court in July that law
enforcement officers had tortured him, including by stripping him naked, tying his legs and
hands and pouring cold water on him, and that he was also sexually harassed, beaten and
threatened. The judge did not open an investigation into his allegations and he was sentenced
to seven years’ imprisonment.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

67

Governments must ensure independent, impartial and effective investigations into
allegations of torture and other ill-treatment, and implement measures to prevent these
crimes.

IMPUNITY
States across the region continued to facilitate impunity for perpetrators of serious human
rights violations, highlighting the failings of deeply flawed domestic judicial systems.
In Egypt, impunity prevailed for crimes under international law and other grave human rights
violations committed in 2023 or the past decade, including the unlawful killings in August
2013 of at least 900 people during violent dispersals of sit-ins by supporters of the ousted
president Mohamed Morsi. Similarly, the investigation into the 2020 Beirut port explosion in
Lebanon, which killed at least 236 people, remained suspended since December 2021 due to
legal complaints filed against the investigation’s judges by politicians implicated in the tragedy.
In Iran, no public official was held accountable for unlawful killings, enforced disappearance,
torture and other ill-treatment, including rape and other forms of sexual violence, and other
crimes under international law or grave human rights violations committed during 2023 or
previous years.
The international community failed to ensure accountability for human rights violations. In
March, the UN Independent Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) on Libya issued its final report,
concluding that “there are grounds to believe State security forces and armed militia groups
have committed a wide array of war crimes and crimes against humanity”. However, the UN
Human Rights Council did not extend the FFM’s mandate. Concerns remained over the
impartiality, independence, transparency and effectiveness of the investigations announced by
the Tripoli-based Public Prosecution into the death and destruction following Storm Daniel,
including examining whether the Libyan authorities and those in de facto control failed to
protect the population’s rights to life.
Governments must combat impunity by undertaking thorough, independent, impartial,
effective and transparent investigations into human rights violations and crimes under
international law, and bringing suspected perpetrators to justice in fair trials in civilian
courts.

68

The State of the World’s Human Rights

THE STATE OF
THE WORLD’S
HUMAN RIGHTS
A-Z COUNTRY ENTRIES

AFGHANISTAN
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
Amid a deteriorating humanitarian crisis
and economic upheavals, people in
Afghanistan suffered extreme repression
and human rights violations. The Taliban
placed increasing restrictions on women
and girls, apparently aimed at erasing them
completely from public arenas. There were
international calls to investigate this gender
persecution as a crime against humanity.
Freedom of expression was eroded, and
those peacefully expressing views critical of
the Taliban faced enforced disappearance,
unlawful detention, arbitrary arrest, torture
and other ill-treatment. The culture of
impunity continued, including for war
crimes and crimes against humanity.
Freedom of religion shrank further under
Taliban rule. Ethnic groups, including
religious minorities, faced increasing
marginalization, prejudice and forced
evictions. The Taliban enforced public
executions and corporal punishment such
as stoning and flogging.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
A devastating humanitarian crisis deepened
during the year, exacerbated by the Taliban
takeover in 2021, disasters such as
earthquakes and floods, and consecutive
years of drought. UN agencies estimated that
the number of people in need of assistance
increased from 18.4 million in 2022 to nearly
29 million by August 2023. The WHO warned
that millions were at risk of malnutrition and
disease with poor or no access to healthcare
and food, including 2.3 million children at
risk of acute malnutrition. In addition to
international isolation and financial sanctions
in response to the Taliban takeover, the
country’s UN humanitarian response
programme had received only 34.8% of its
funding as of November. Humanitarian
challenges were set to increase amid
Pakistan’s mass deportation of Afghan

70

refugees. Iran and Türkiye also continued to
deport Afghan refugees.
The healthcare system continued to be
dependent on international aid and remained
fragile due to lack of adequate infrastructure
and resources.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
The Taliban’s draconian restrictions on the
rights of women and girls, together with the
use of arbitrary arrest and detention,
enforced disappearance and torture and
other ill-treatment, were found by Amnesty
International and the International
Commission of Jurists (ICJ) possibly to
amount to the crime against humanity of
gender persecution.1
In April, the Taliban extended the ban on
women working outside the home to include
jobs with the UN, creating additional
challenges in delivering humanitarian
assistance. Bans remained on women
working in the public sector, except in areas
such as healthcare, primary education, or
specific security institutions such as airports
or women’s prisons. Women were banned
from appearing in public alone or travelling
for more than 72km without a male
chaperone. Beauty salons were forcibly
closed from July, impacting some 60,000
women-owned businesses, according to UN
reports.
The ban on women participating in sports
activities, or visiting public parks, continued.
In some provinces, including Herat, the
Taliban authorities reported introducing
additional localized restrictions such as
banning lone women from going to
restaurants.
Restrictions on girls’ education expanded.
In addition to the ban on girls’ enrolment in
education beyond primary school, in June
international NGOs, including programmes
led by UNICEF, were banned from providing
community-based education and were
requested to transfer programmes to local
organizations. Nearly 4,500 women were
reportedly dismissed from jobs in education
in June and July.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Multiple UN agencies reported an increase
in child and forced marriage, as well as
gender-based violence and femicide with
impunity. The Taliban progressively dissolved
the institutional framework of support for
survivors of gender-based violence that had
operated under the former government,
leaving survivors dependent on sharia law
(Islamic law) and at risk of further abuse.
There were widespread reports of women
and girls suffering from depression, in some
cases leading to suicide.

DISCRIMINATION
People from Hazara, Uzbek, Turkmen and
Tajik ethnic groups faced growing
marginalization and forced eviction from their
homes and land. Members of the Baloch
community were reportedly detained and
forcibly disappeared.
The Taliban settled disputes over land and
livestock in favour of Kuchi communities,
who are ethnically Pashtun and move
seasonally, and forced local Hazara
communities to pay compensation for cases
related to missing livestock dating back over
20 years. There were reportedly instances of
Kuchi communities attacking Hazara
residents.
In addition to beatings of Hazaras and
destruction of their property, including
vehicles, houses and crops, six Hazara men
were killed between June and August in Khas
Urozgan area, Urozgan province. Concerns
around impunity for these crimes continued.
In October, two Hazaras were reportedly
killed at the border between Lal wa Srajangal
and Dawlat Yar districts of Ghor province.
Several killings of Hazara men, including
religious leaders, were reported in Herat
province in November and December.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
Civilians continued to face attacks across the
country despite a reduction in conflict-related
violence following the Taliban takeover. The
UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) recorded 3,774 civilian casualties
between August 2021 and May 2023 (1,095
killed; 2,679 wounded), the majority of which

The State of the World’s Human Rights

were attributed to the armed group Islamic
State of Khorasan Province (IS-KP). On 13
October, IS-KP claimed responsibility for an
attack on a Shia/Hazara mosque in Baghlan
province that left at least 20 people dead and
more than 60 wounded.
In the context of fighting with the National
Resistance Front (NRF), Amnesty
International reported in June that the Taliban
had enforced collective punishments on
civilians in Panjshir province, including mass
or village-wide arbitrary arrests. The report
also verified that between 12 and 14
September 2022 alone, the Taliban had
carried out at least 14 extrajudicial
executions of NRF detainees in Khenj and
Darah districts, with many more extrajudicial
executions in Khenj, Darah and Rokha
districts. The total number of people
extrajudicially killed during this period is
estimated at least 48, possibly many more.2
A pattern of mass extrajudicial executions of
people associated with the former
government and members of armed groups
resisting the Taliban continued with impunity
and constituted war crimes. UNAMA
recorded at least 218 extrajudicial killings of
members of the former government and
security personnel between August 2021 and
June 2023.

DEATH PENALTY, TORTURE AND OTHER
ILL-TREATMENT
People were subjected to arbitrary arrest and
detention and enforced disappearance, and
remained at risk of execution, death in
custody and torture and other ill-treatment.
UNAMA recorded 1,600 incidents of
detention-related human rights violations
between January 2022 and July 2023, half of
them constituting torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment.
In June, Amnesty International found
evidence that at least three civilians had been
tortured to death by the Taliban after being
accused of allegiance to the NRF in Panjshir
province in 2022. No investigations into this
or other cases of torture were reported.
In May, the UN expressed concern at the
Taliban’s continued use of public executions

71

and corporal punishment. At least one public
execution was reported as of June. The de
facto Supreme Court in Afghanistan reported
that hundreds of individuals had been
sentenced to qisas (retribution in kind),
including stoning. The use of public corporal
punishment amounting to torture and other
ill-treatment continued. UNAMA documented
that 274 men, 58 women and two boys had
been subjected to public flogging between
November 2022 and April 2023, and 103
individuals had been sentenced to such
punishments as of May.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Religious minorities including Shia, Sikhs,
Hindus, Christians, Ahmadiyya and Ismaili
continued to face marginalization, prejudice
and discrimination.
Restrictions on religious events and
celebrations were imposed citing security
reasons. These included restrictions on the
Ashura commemoration in July, which is
mainly observed by Shia Muslims. On 28
July, in Ghazni province, four Shia-Hazaras,
including a child and a woman, were killed
and six others were wounded by Taliban
forces shooting to disperse Ashura
commemorations.
The Taliban excluded Shia jurisprudence
from the education system so that religious
teaching was exclusively based on the Sunni
sect of Islam.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The space for freedom of expression and
media continued to shrink drastically. In
March, at least two journalists were
reportedly killed in a bomb attack. Dozens
were arbitrarily arrested and harassed for
reports critical of the Taliban or violating
Taliban rules. At least 64 journalists were
detained by the Taliban for varying periods
between August 2021 and August 2023.
Murtaza Behboodi, a Franco-Afghan
journalist, was released after nine months’
detention.
More than 80% of women journalists
stopped working between August 2021 and
August 2023 because of increasing

72

restrictions. Other restrictions included
women only appearing on television with their
faces covered.
The Taliban forcibly closed the Hamisha
Bahar radio and television station for 20 days
in Nangarhar province for running mixedgender classes in journalism.
Between the August 2021 Taliban takeover
and August 2023, more than half of
registered media outlets closed, and two
thirds of all journalists left their jobs.
Repression of those who expressed views
critical of the Taliban continued, including
against people who expressed their criticisms
via social media. Among them was Rasoul
Parsi, a university professor arrested in
March and who remained in detention at the
end of the year.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
Unlawful and excessive force was used to
attack peaceful protests, including many led
by women. The UN reported that between
March and June, 95 protests led by women
had been documented across Afghanistan.
The Taliban reportedly used firearms, water
cannons and stun guns to disperse protests,
including a women-led protest against the
forced closure of beauty salons in the capital,
Kabul, on 18 July.
Arbitrary arrests and enforced
disappearances of protesters continued and
many protests were moved to online
platforms as a result.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Activists, human rights defenders, and
members of civil society continued to face
violence, intimidation, and surveillance, with
many being subjected to arbitrary arrest,
enforced disappearance and unlawful
detention. Detainees suffered torture and
other ill-treatment, including sexual abuse,
according to UN reports.
Nida Parwani and Zhulia Parsi, two women
human rights activists, were arrested on 19
and 27 September respectively, together with
members of their family, and released in
December. Matiullah Wesa, an education
rights activist, was released in October after

The State of the World’s Human Rights

seven months’ imprisonment. Nargis Sadat
and Parisa Azada Mubariz were arbitrarily
arrested by the Taliban, and released after a
period of imprisonment, while many other
activists and journalists remained
imprisoned.

REFUGEES’ RIGHTS
A pervasive fear of persecution by the Taliban
led to thousands of people leaving the
country. Many feared attacks by non-state
actors such as IS-KP. More than 1.4 million
Afghan refugees in Pakistan were at risk of
forced return.3 More than 490,891 Afghan
refugees were reported to have been
returned to Afghanistan by the Pakistani
government by December. Many others faced
deportation or the threat of deportation from
Iran and Türkiye.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S
RIGHTS
As a result of years of conflict, Afghanistan
had one of the largest populations of
internally displaced people in the world.
People who had been returned from Pakistan
and other states faced harsh winter
conditions without adequate resources,
including housing, access to work, healthcare
and adequate livelihood.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Consensual same-sex relations remained
illegal and punishable by death. LGBTI
people continued to face a host of human
rights violations perpetrated by the Taliban,
including discrimination, targeted violence,
threats and arbitrary detention. Many
continued to live in hiding, fearing a risk to
their lives, while some incidents of forced
marriages of LGBTI people were also
reported.

IMPUNITY
A culture of impunity, particularly for crimes
under international law, remained pervasive.
The results of ongoing investigations by the
ICC had not been made public by the end of
the year.4 Amnesty International called on the
UN Human Rights Council to establish an

The State of the World’s Human Rights

independent international accountability
mechanism to collect and preserve evidence
for possible criminal proceedings, in addition
to the mandate of the UN Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in
Afghanistan. In July, the Special Rapporteur
stated that the severe discrimination against
women and girls amounted to the crime
against humanity of gender persecution. He
further stated that the Taliban’s aim of total
domination over women and girls by
governing with systemic discrimination could
be “characterized as gender apartheid”.
Access to justice for the people of
Afghanistan was severely curtailed as the
Taliban suspended or abolished formerly
existing laws, instead introducing a narrow
interpretation of sharia law and replacing
former judicial and legal professionals with
their preferred candidates.
1. Afghanistan: The Taliban’s War on Women: The Crime against
Humanity of Gender Persecution in Afghanistan, 25 May
2. Afghanistan: “Your sons are in the mountains”: The collective
punishment of civilians in Panjshir by the Taliban, 7 June
3. “Pakistan: Halt mass detentions and deportations of Afghan
refugees”, 10 November
4. “Afghanistan: ICC justice should match victims’ demands”,
6 December

ALBANIA
Republic of Albania
Journalists were subjected to hate speech,
physical assaults and a gun attack.
Domestic violence against women
continued, with 12 women killed by
partners and family members. Albania and
Italy agreed on the construction of two
detention centres in Albania for migrants
attempting to reach Italy. The CEDAW
Committee reported a lack of progress on
LGBTI people’s rights. The spreading of
infectious disease by negligence was
abolished as a criminal offence. The
reduced numbers of courts raised concerns
about access to justice for citizens.

73

BACKGROUND

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS

Local elections were held in May, with the
ruling Socialist Party winning the majority of
the municipalities.

In October, a report by the CEDAW
Committee noted that Albania’s 2016-2020
national action plan for LGBTI people had not
succeeded in eliminating discrimination
against lesbian, bisexual, transgender and
intersex women, and expressed concern
about the increasingly hostile environment
they faced in the country.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In March, a gun attack on the headquarters
of the national television broadcaster Top
Channel resulted in the death of a security
guard.
In January, a journalist and his wife were
physically attacked in Lezhë by two
businessmen following the publication of an
article he had written about a court case.
Journalists were also attacked by political
figures. Erion Veliaj, the mayor of Tirana,
referred to an investigative journalist known
as “O.X.” as a “contract killer” in response to
an article she had written highlighting the role
the mayor had played in the incinerator
project for public waste management in
Tirana.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Domestic violence against women was rife.
According to police data, during the first
three months of the year there were more
than 1,000 reported cases of violence against
women, resulting in 510 protection orders. Of
the 5,210 cases of domestic violence
recorded by the police in 2022, in March the
public prosecutor’s office reported only 1,880
cases; men were responsible for 92.8% of
the attacks. Between January and
September, 12 women had been killed by
their partners or other family members.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In November, Albania and Italy signed an
agreement establishing that Italy would build
two detention centres in Albania to detain
people intercepted by Italian authorities at
sea while trying to reach Italian shores.
Human rights organizations and others
expressed concern about the impact this
could have on the human rights of refugees,
asylum seekers, and migrants, including
automatic and therefore arbitrary detention.

74

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The Constitutional Court abolished Article
89(b) of the criminal code as
disproportionate. The Article, which came
into force during the Covid-19 pandemic,
provided for a sentence of up to eight years’
imprisonment for the unintentional spreading
of infectious diseases that had serious
consequences for or endangered people’s
lives.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
On 1 February, a new judicial structure
entered into force, reducing the number of
courts in Albania from 34 to 16. There were
concerns that this would make access to
justice more expensive and more difficult.

RIGHT TO LIFE
In December, a prisoner at Peqin highsecurity prison shot and killed one inmate
and injured another, raising concerns about
the security measures in place at the prison.

ALGERIA
People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria
Authorities escalated their closure of civic
space by convicting at least one activist,
five journalists and a researcher for
exercising their right to freedom of
expression. Authorities shut down at least
two online outlets and two affiliates of the
League for the Defence of Human Rights
(LADDH), ordered the closure of two human
rights groups, and suspended at least one
political party. Judicial authorities also
closed down at least two churches. At least

The State of the World’s Human Rights

36 femicides were reported. At least
18,302 migrants were summarily expelled
from Algeria between January and
December.

BACKGROUND
In February, Algeria recalled its ambassador
in France after Algerian activist Amira
Bouraoui fled to France. Authorities then
prosecuted six individuals, including Amira
Bouraoui and her mother, on fabricated
charges, including “migrant smuggling” and
forming an “association of wrongdoers”.
In March, the UPR concluded its review of
Algeria. The country accepted
recommendations to amend its repressive
law on public meetings and demonstrations,
and the provision that excuses rapists who
marry their victims. It rejected the
recommendation to amend overly broad
provisions in the Penal Code that criminalize
those who peacefully exercise their rights to
freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly.1
In September, the UN Special Rapporteur
on the Rights to Freedom of Peaceful
Assembly and of Association visited Algeria to
assess the situation in the country, as did the
UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of
Human Rights Defenders in December.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Authorities investigated, prosecuted and
convicted journalists, at least one activist and
a geopolitics researcher in relation to critical
views they had expressed, mainly online. In
April, authorities shut down at least two
online newspaper and radio outlets.2
On 2 April, an Algiers court ordered the
dissolution of media company Interface
Media and its two news outlets Radio M and
Maghreb Emergent, headed by journalist
Ihsane El Kadi, and the payment of a DZD 10
million fine (around USD 73,862) to the
Audiovisual Regulatory Authority. In June, an
appeals court sentenced Ihsane El Kadi to
seven years in prison, with two years
suspended, for his journalistic work,
including in relation to his reports for the
French newspaper La Croix.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

On 4 July, a court in Algiers sentenced
Amazigh activist Slimane Bouhafs to three
years’ imprisonment and a fine on a bogus
charge of “harming the integrity of the
national territory” through his online
publications.3
On 13 August, media reported that the
Barbie movie was banned from Algerian
cinemas for “harming morals”.
In August, authorities promulgated Law
23-14 on information, which imposes undue
licensing and ownership regulations, such as
requiring media organizations to be
exclusively owned by Algerian nationals. It
includes vague and broad provisions that ban
journalists from, among other things,
publishing “false information” or information
that might “advocate colonialism, undermine
national memory and the symbols of the war
of national liberation”, and provides for a
heavy fine and confiscation of property for
any media receiving foreign funds not
designated for subscriptions or advertising.
On 26 October, an appeals court in the
eastern city of Constantine sentenced
journalist Mustapha Bendjama to 20 months’
imprisonment, with 12 months’ suspended,
for receiving foreign funds that “might harm
state security” and “publishing classified
information or documents on an electronic
network” in relation to his journalistic work.
The court also gave researcher Raouf Farrah
the same sentence on the same charges for
collecting money for people in detention and
for his work as a researcher.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Authorities escalated their crackdown on
independent groups, ordering the closure of
two human rights groups and suspending at
least one political party.
On 23 January, in Bejaia in eastern Algeria,
authorities sealed the LADDH’s Centre for
Documenting Human Rights, citing a 2022
judgment dissolving the LADDH. LADDH
leaders had only that month learned of the
June 2022 dissolution order that followed a
complaint filed by the interior ministry.
On 30 January, in Tizi Ouzou in eastern
Algeria, authorities sealed and closed down

75

the House of Human and Citizens’ Rights, an
LADDH affiliate since 1990 that ran a library
and documentation centre.4
In February, Abderrahmane Zitout, whose
brother Larbi belongs to Rachad, a political
group the authorities had arbitrarily labelled
as “terrorist” in February 2022, went on
hunger strike for the third time to protest
against his prolonged pretrial detention
related to his brother’s activism.5
On 23 February, the State Council, Algeria’s
highest administrative body, suspended the
political party Democracy and Social
Movement and ordered the closure of its
headquarters.
In September, authorities arbitrarily
prevented for the second consecutive year
the political party Rally for Culture and
Democracy from organizing its summer
camp, planned for 28 September to 1
October in Batna .

In July, a court in Algiers sentenced former
military officer and whistle-blower Mohamed
Benhlima to seven years’ imprisonment and
a fine. Mohamed Benhlima had sought
asylum in Spain in 2019, before he was
extradited to Algeria in 2021. During a court
hearing on 12 July, he told the judge that law
enforcement officers had tortured him by
stripping him naked, tying his legs and
hands, and pouring cold water on him. He
said he had also been sexually harassed,
beaten and threatened. The judge did not
order an investigation into these allegations.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY

Authorities did not amend Law No. 08-11 of
25 June 2008 to explicitly prohibit collective
expulsions, nor did they adopt legislation
implementing the UN Refugee Convention
and its Optional Protocol.
According to the Directorate of Surveillance
of the Territory, an official police body in
Niger, Algeria summarily expelled at least
18,302 migrants – mostly from West Africa
– to Niger between January and December.

Authorities continued to unduly restrict the
right to freedom of peaceful assembly,
including by arresting people ahead of
planned protests.
On 20 August, according to the National
Committee for the Liberation of Detainees, at
least 40 activists were arrested, including
Soheib Debbaghi, Mohamed Tadjadit and
lawyer Sofiane Ouali, to prevent a peaceful
gathering in Ifri in eastern Algeria to
commemorate the 1956 Soummam
Congress, a historic event in the country’s
fight for independence. They were released
later that day.
On 8 September, a judge in a tribunal in
Amizour commune, northern Algeria, placed
political activist Khaled Tazaghart under
judicial control, confiscated his passport and
banned him from travelling, on fabricated
charges of “spreading false information” after
he published on Facebook calls to gather
peacefully in memory of victims of the
wildfires in Algeria.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Judicial authorities continued to ignore
testimonies of torture given in court.

76

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Authorities continued to use Decree Law
06-3, which restricts religions other than
Sunni Islam. They closed at least two
churches, bringing to 31 the number closed
since 2018.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
The Penal Code and Family Code continued
to unlawfully discriminate against women in
matters of inheritance, marriage, divorce,
child custody and guardianship.
In May, the authorities promulgated Law
23-04 against human trafficking, which
mentions “prostitution”, sexual exploitation
and forced marriage. This made the crimes
punishable by up to 30 years in prison and
fines, and by life imprisonment if the victim
was subjected to torture or sexual violence.
The activist group Féminicides Algérie
recorded at least 36 femicides. Women’s
rights groups continued to ask for femicide to
be recognized as a crime.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The Penal Code continued to criminalize
consensual adult same-sex sexual relations,
punishable by up to two years in prison and a
fine.
In January, the trade ministry announced a
campaign against all products that contained
“colours and symbols contrary to the
morals”, referring to the rainbow colours of
the LGBTI movement.
On 10 August, the Audiovisual Regulatory
Authority suspended Essalam TV, a private
Algerian TV channel, from broadcasting for
20 days for showing a movie that portrayed a
wedding between two men, which was
deemed “contrary to the precepts of Islam
and the values of the Algerian society”.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
In May, authorities promulgated Law 23-02,
which restricts the right to form trade unions,
allowing authorities to refuse applications
using vaguely worded provisions relating to
“national unity” and “national values and
constants”. It also allows authorities to
dissolve a trade union on multiple grounds,
including persisting in “illicit” strikes, and to
fine any trade union that joins an
international, continental or regional trade
union without informing the authorities.
Additionally, it provides for punishments of
up to a year in prison and a fine for anyone
who receives foreign donations and legacies
without prior approval from the authorities.

2. “Algeria: Conviction of journalist is latest escalation in crackdown on
media”, 3 April
3. “Algeria: Activist sentenced following refoulement: Slimane
Bouhafs”, 29 August
4. “Algeria: Reverse decision to dissolve leading human rights group”, 8
February
5. “Algeria: Jailed brother of activist on hunger strike: Abderrahmane
Zitout”, 20 February
6. “Global: Call by presidents of five southern European states to tackle
the climate crisis underscores the urgent need to phase out fossil
fuels”, 3 August

ANDORRA
Principality of Andorra
A woman human rights defender who raised
concerns about women’s rights, including
access to abortion, stood trial accused of
defamation. A total ban on abortion
remained in place.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS

In April, Algeria experienced an extreme
heatwave that the World Weather Attribution
found was “almost impossible without climate
change”. In July, at least 140 wildfires spread
across 17 regions, killing at least 34 people
and displacing 1,500.6

In December, Vanessa Mendoza Cortés, the
president of the women’s rights organization
Associació Stop Violències, stood trial
accused of a “crime against the prestige of
the institutions”. The prosecutor’s office
brought criminal charges against her in 2020
following her engagement with the CEDAW
Committee when she spoke out about the
harmful impact of a total ban on abortion in
Andorra, and in July requested that the court
fine her EUR 6,000, an additional EUR 6,000
to compensate the Andorran government and
a six-month ban from exercising any public
function.
In October, the UN Secretary General’s
annual report included Andorra in a list of 40
countries across the world where individuals
and organizations faced reprisals for
cooperating with the UN.

DEATH PENALTY

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS

Courts continued to hand down death
sentences. The last execution was in 1993.

A total ban on abortion remained in place.
Those in need of an abortion, and with the
means to do so, had to travel to other
countries to seek essential healthcare,
violating their rights and inflicting additional
stress.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT

1. “Algeria/Morocco: Deep issues remain despite UN human rights
review”, 6 April

The State of the World’s Human Rights

77

In September, the UN Committee on the
Rights of the Child called on the authorities to
decriminalize abortion and ensure access for
adolescent girls to safe abortion and postabortion care services within Andorra.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Defamation laws including the criminalization
of legitimate criticism of the authorities
remained in force, breaching international
human rights law.

DISCRIMINATION
Legislation banning the wearing of
conspicuous religious symbols in educational
institutions remained in place, discriminating
particularly against Muslim women and girls
who wished to wear headscarves.

ANGOLA
Republic of Angola
The authorities used excessive or
unnecessary force to impede or prevent the
right to peaceful assembly. In most cases,
where such force was used, protesters were
arbitrarily arrested or detained. At least five
protesters and one bystander were
unlawfully killed, including at least two
children. The right to freedom of
association was threatened. Teachers faced
underpayment as well as non-payment of
their salaries. Hundreds of people were
forcibly evicted from their homes. The
severe and prolonged drought in the south
had a devastating impact on the rights to
food and health, particularly for children.

BACKGROUND
There was limited progress in the human
rights situation following a year of turmoil
around the 2022 general elections. The
National Action Plan for the Protection and
Promotion of the Human Rights of Persons
with Albinism, and the National Action Plan
for Promotion of the Human Rights of
Persons with Disabilities were adopted.
However, the UN Committee on the Rights of

78

Persons with Disabilities noted that Angola’s
approach to disability was yet to meet
international standards.
On 30 May, the government increased fuel
prices from AOA 160 (USD 0.26) to AOA 300
(USD 0.49) per litre. The rising costs, due in
part to Russia’s war in Ukraine, resulted in
cost-of-living increases, which were
compounded by high unemployment rates
that disproportionately affected youth, and
triggered further social unrest throughout the
year.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
The Status of Non-Governmental
Organizations bill (NGO bill) was approved by
parliament on 25 May. NGOs criticized it on
grounds that, if enacted, it would limit the
right to association and give the executive
excessive powers to interfere in their
activities, including the power to audit,
dissolve or limit the operations of
associations. At the end of the year, the bill
was awaiting debate before a special
parliamentary committee and final approval
by the president.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
The authorities repressed peaceful
demonstrations using excessive or
unnecessary force leading in some cases to
unlawful killings, intimidation, beatings and
arbitrary arrests or detention. Activists were
arrested for joining protests, and others
simply for being in the vicinity of protest
action.
On 10 February, the Angolan National
Police (PNA) prevented a vigil from going
ahead in the capital Luanda and in Benguela
on grounds of public security. Three NGOs –
Union (Omunga), the Youth Movement for
Local Authorities (Movimento Jovens pelas
Autarquias) and Friends of Angola (Amigos
de Angola) – had called for the vigil to
demand the decentralization of government
powers to local authorities.
On 18 February, the PNA prevented
members of the judiciary from continuing a
peaceful march in Luanda, saying that they
were following orders from their “superiors”.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Employees of the first and second instance
courts, the Ministry of Justice and Human
Rights, and the Attorney General’s Office had
begun their march at the Luanda District
Court to demand better working conditions,
promotion prospects and pay.
The PNA stopped a protest by activists
planned to take place at the Largo da
Sagrada Familia church in Luanda on 6 April,
to call for the release of the activist Gilson da
Silva Moreira (also known as Tanaice Neutro),
and to denounce the abusive use of
administrative detention against activists.
Gilson da Silva Moreira was arrested on 13
January 2022 on allegations of “outraging the
state, its symbols, and organs”. In October
2022, he was given a suspended prison
sentence of one year and three months but
was kept in jail until his release on 23 June
2023, following pressure from national and
international civil society organizations.
PNA officers used excessive or unnecessary
force when they disrupted a march on 22
April, organized by the Movement of Angolan
Students in Luanda. They arrested five
activists, injuring one of them. The protesters
were demanding a peaceful resolution to a
salary dispute between the government and
the National Union of Higher Education
Teachers (SINPES).
On 17 June, PNA officers used tear gas
against hundreds of demonstrators in Luanda
and Benguela to prevent them from
peacefully protesting at the fuel price rise of
30 May, parliament’s approval of the NGO bill
and the Luanda City Council’s 22 May
decision to ban women vendors (zungueiras)
from trading on the streets. There were
reports of unspecified numbers of protesters
being detained and wounded in Luanda.
On 16 September, the PNA broke up a
peaceful demonstration by motorcycle taxi
drivers protesting at restrictions imposed by
the Luanda City Council on various routes in
the city. Seven civil society activists were
detained, including Gilson da Silva Moreira
(see above), Gildo das Ruas, Adolfo Campos
and Abrao Pedro dos Santos. On 19
September, a Luanda court sentenced them

The State of the World’s Human Rights

to two years and five months’ imprisonment
each.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
Security forces killed at least five protesters
and one bystander in their attempt to stop
protests.
On 15 February, the PNA confirmed that a
16-year-old boy, known only as Serginho,
who was killed the day before in Luanda’s
Uije neighbourhood, had been shot by a
police officer. The police said he was shot
when officers tried to prevent clashes
between rival groups during a protest by
residents demanding better road conditions.
The boy was not participating in the protest.
According to the police, investigations to
identify the officer responsible for the killing
and bring him to account were ongoing at the
end of the year.
Five people, including a 12-year-old boy,
were killed and eight injured by PNA officers
at a protest in Huambo province on 5 June.
The protest had been organized by
motorcycle taxi drivers against the fuel price
rise. Police used tear gas and live
ammunition to disperse the crowd and later
said the killings and injuries were
“unavoidable” and regrettable.1 The
authorities did not launch an investigation
into the events.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
On 28 January, the PNA arrested 12 young
people as they gathered for a march at the
Largo das Heroínas monument in Luanda to
demand the release of activists they
considered to be political prisoners. The
police dumped three of them – Laurinda
Gouveia, Geraldo Dala and Matulunga César
– 60km from Luanda, in Bengo province.
There was no information as to the fate of the
remaining nine.
Five activists were arrested by the PNA on 2
June in Benguela province, in front of the
office for deputies of the provincial Benguela
government, for protesting at parliament’s
approval of the NGO bill. They were released
by a court on 6 June, after paying a fine of
AOA 50,000 (about USD 83).

79

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
The dispute between the teachers’ union,
SINPES, and the government, which began
on 27 February continued throughout the
year. SINPES called on the government to
comply with the memorandum of
understanding signed by both parties in
November 2021, which provided for, among
other things, a monthly salary equivalent to
USD 2,000 for a trainee assistant professor,
and USD 5,000 for a full professor. They also
demanded payment of outstanding salaries
owed to them and to school administrators.

FORCED EVICTIONS
On 27 February, officers from the PNA and
the Criminal Investigation Service, with the
support of the Viana municipal police,
demolished about 300 houses in Zango 3
neighbourhood, section B in Luanda.
Hundreds of people were left homeless.
Residents who refused to leave their homes
or gathered to protest were beaten and
arrested. One of them, known only as
Adilson, told human rights defenders that he
was arrested and kept in a police station for
five hours. According to residents, the
demolitions were carried out to make way for
a shopping complex.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In the south, the population continued to
suffer the impact of severe and prolonged
drought. According to UNICEF, 3.8 million
people needed humanitarian assistance,
2 million of whom were children; 600,000
people needed health assistance, and 1
million were in need of nutrition assistance.
The government failed to provide timely
humanitarian relief, and needs were
addressed mainly by NGOs or UN agencies
like UNICEF and the World Food Programme.
1. “Angola: Police must exercise restraint during nationwide protests”,
9 June

80

ARGENTINA
Republic of Argentina
Gender-based killings continued unabated
in 2023 and impunity persisted. Access to
abortion remained inconsistent in many
parts of the country, despite its
decriminalization. The abusive use of force
with a racist bias was widespread within the
security forces. Restriction and
criminalization of protest prevailed.
Measures on climate change fell short of
targets required to curb global emissions.

BACKGROUND
The country remained mired in an economic
and social crisis. By June, 40.1% of the
population was living in poverty and the
unemployment rate was 6.2%. National
elections took place in October and
November, and the party La Libertad Avanza
won with 55.65% of the vote.
In December, the president issued a
presidential decree of necessity and urgency,
repealing or modifying more than 70 laws,
and introduced to Congress a bill on Bases
and Starting Points for the Freedom of
Argentinians, declaring a public emergency
until 31 December 2025 and establishing
regressive changes in healthcare, education,
housing, freedom of expression and
assembly, and gender, among other areas.
During the UPR, Argentina received 287
recommendations, including some relating to
access to abortion, the Indigenous
emergency land law and persistent
institutional violence.
The UN Committee on Enforced
Disappearances recommended the creation
of a federal agency to coordinate the search
for missing persons.
Congress had failed to appoint an
ombudsperson since 2009. The Supreme
Court, composed only of men, had had a
vacancy since 2021.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
According to figures collected by NGOs, 308
gender-based killings were recorded in 2023,
62% of them in domestic settings. The latest
official data showed that the number of hate
crimes based on gender identity or sexual
orientation had increased to 129 in 2022.
At the end of the year, limited results had
emerged from the ongoing investigation into
the disappearance and possible femicide of
28-year-old Cecilia Strzyzowski in the city of
Resistencia in Chaco province.1
Sofía Inés Fernández, a 40-year-old
transgender woman, was found dead in a
police station cell in the town of Derqui,
where she had been detained having been
accused of robbery. The accused police
officers claimed that she died by suicide, but
the preliminary autopsy revealed asphyxia as
the cause of death. By the end of the year no
one was charged over her death.
In October, Congress approved a bill
incorporating violence in digital environments
into the definition of violence against women.
The law provided for precautionary protection
measures, including the power of judges to
order digital platforms to remove violent
content.
By the end of the year, the cases of two
journalists, who had filed complaints with the
courts after experiencing online harassment
and violence, remained pending.
Between 2020 and 2021, 3,219 cases of
child sexual abuse were registered, of which
74.2% of victims had been abused by
someone in their close environment.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Significant obstacles persisted in accessing
abortion services, despite a 2020 law
legalizing abortion within the first 14 weeks of
pregnancy. According to the National Ministry
of Health, from approval of the law up to
October 2023, the public health sector had
registered 245,015 abortions. No official data
was available on the number of abortions in
the private sector, in a context in which 57%
of the population use private healthcare.
According to official data released in 2023,
at least 1,394 children aged under 15 gave

The State of the World’s Human Rights

birth in 2021. Despite a decrease in
pregnancies among children and adolescents
aged between 10 and 19 between 2016 and
2021, more than 46,236 people in this age
group gave birth during 2021.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In May, the CERD Committee highlighted the
persistence of racial profiling in the abusive
use of force by security forces, particularly
against Indigenous Peoples, migrants,
refugees and marginalized groups.
There were no significant advances in the
investigation into the 2020 torture and death
of Mauro Coronel in police detention in the
province of Santiago del Estero. No one was
charged over his death.2
In August, one of six police officers accused
of killing 16-year-old Joaquín Paredes was
sentenced to life imprisonment by a court in
Cruz del Eje in the province of Córdoba.
Joaquín and his friends had been celebrating
a birthday in the street during Covid-19
isolation measures, when police shot them.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
TikTok, which had more than 16.5 million
users in the country in 2023, failed to
guarantee children’s rights to privacy and
health. The social media platform’s extraction
of personal data was not deactivated and
geo-localization was used despite a lack of
authorization by the user.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Protests in the face of a reform to the
constitution of Jujuy province adopted on 15
June were reportedly met with excessive and
unlawful use of force.3 Joel Paredes suffered
the loss of his right eye as a result of a rubber
bullet fired by the Jujuy police. The reform
restricted the right to protest and Indigenous
Peoples’ exercise of consultation,
participation and territorial ownership.
Dozens of protesters were arbitrarily detained
and criminalized, including Alberto Nallar, a
human rights lawyer, charged with sedition
and other offences. Sedition is a charge used
unlawfully to criminalize dissent.

81

On 15 December, the Ministry of Security
issued the “Protocol for the maintenance of
public order in the event of
roadblocks” (Resolution 943/2023). The
protocol established that any demonstration
involving street or road blockades constitutes
a “crime in flagrante delicto” and enables the
security forces to evict or disperse the
protest. It also contains provisions to gather
information and criminalize and stigmatize
the leaders and participants of public
demonstrations.

IMPUNITY
Trials before ordinary civilian courts
continued for crimes against humanity
committed under the 1976-1983 military
regime. Between 2006 and September 2023,
307 rulings were handed down, bringing the
total number of convictions to 1,159 and
acquittals to 178.
At the end of the year, a sentence by the
Inter-American Court of Human Rights was
still pending regarding the impunity over the
bombing of the Argentine Israeli Mutual
Association (AMIA) Jewish centre in 1994.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Although Argentina took measures to reduce
its emissions in sectors such as
transportation and construction, it focused its
energy strategy on fossil fuels, which
prevented the country from reaching its
climate targets due to increased emissions.
1. “Argentina: Woman disappeared amid possible femicide”, 3 July
2. “One dead, three years, no arrests: no justice for Mauro Coronel”, 1
September (Spanish only)
3. “Argentina: Violent repression and criminalization in response to
protests in Jujuy”, 5 October

ARMENIA
Republic of Armenia
Law enforcement officers used unlawful
force during anti-government protests.
Journalists faced harassment and violence
from government supporters. No progress

82

was reported in investigating war crimes
and other crimes under international law
during the armed conflict with Azerbaijan in
2020. Discrimination against LGBTI people
remained commonplace. Several lawyers
reported being ill-treated while visiting
clients in detention. Environmental activists
continued to face harassment. The death
penalty was abolished in all circumstances.

BACKGROUND
Public discontent and protests grew over the
government’s handling of tensions with
neighbouring Azerbaijan, including
Azerbaijan’s blockade and military takeover of
its breakaway Nagorno-Karabakh region
populated by ethnic Armenians (see
Azerbaijan entry). An influx of more than
100,000 refugees from Azerbaijan’s NagornoKarabakh region added to economic and
humanitarian hardships. Relations with
Russia, which Armenia had regarded as its
security guarantor, sharply deteriorated, while
the economy remained heavily dependent on
Russia, including for basic imports and
remittances. In December, Armenia freed two
Azerbaijani prisoners of war after agreeing to
work towards a peace deal with Azerbaijan.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Street protests were widespread, with
incidents of violence by protesters as well as
unnecessary, disproportionate and
sometimes indiscriminate use of force by the
police regularly reported.
On 19 September, thousands gathered in
the capital, Yerevan, to demand the
resignation of the prime minister and protest
against Azerbaijan’s military offensive in
Nagorno-Karabakh. Some protesters broke
windows in government buildings and
clashed with police. The Helsinki Committee
of Armenia, an NGO monitoring the protests,
reported that police at times used
“disproportionate and indiscriminate force”
including beatings and firing stun grenades
directly into the crowd without warning. More
than 140 protesters were reportedly detained
and more than 30 were injured. Most
protesters were released without charge,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

while some faced administrative and criminal
proceedings. By year’s end there had been
no effective investigation into the reports of
unlawful use of force by the police.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The media environment remained largely free
and pluralistic, but was deeply polarized over
the issue of Nagorno-Karabakh and conflict
with Azerbaijan. International observers also
reported an unprecedented level of
disinformation and hate speech. In March,
the European Commission against Racism
and Intolerance (ECRI) welcomed the
decriminalization in July 2022 of the
provision which punished insulting
government officials and public figures.
Concerns remained regarding the safety of
journalists who continued to be regularly
subjected to pressure, insults and violence by
government supporters. At least two
journalists reported being subjected to an
intense campaign of online harassment and
threats, including by some public officials,
after their critical questioning of the prime
minister about events in Nagorno-Karabakh
at a press conference on 25 July. The
investigation into this alleged interference
with journalistic activities was ongoing at
year’s end.
The government’s attempts to restrict free
expression online were deterred after draft
amendments proposed in December 2022
were put on hold following international
criticism. The amendments would have given
the government the power to censor online
content, block websites and curb internet
access under martial law.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
No substantive progress was made in
investigations into war crimes and other
violations of international humanitarian law
during the 2020 armed conflict with
Azerbaijan and its immediate aftermath, or in
bringing suspected perpetrators to justice. On
3 October, parliament voted to ratify the
Rome Statute of the ICC.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Landmines previously planted by Armenian
forces in and around Nagorno-Karabakh in
Azerbaijan continued to pose a lethal threat
and prevented the safe return of displaced
people. According to Azerbaijan’s de-mining
agency, as of August the number of people
wounded or killed by landmines since the
war in 2020 had reached 303, including
civilians. In July, Azerbaijani media reported
that the minefield maps provided by Armenia
were only 25% accurate and that maps for
600,000 mines were still missing.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
More than 100,000 people, virtually the
entire ethnic Armenian population of
Nagorno-Karabakh, were displaced to
Armenia within a few days in September and
October. Armenian authorities largely met the
temporary needs of this rapid influx of a large
number of refugees. Concerns remained,
however, regarding durable solutions and
access to adequate housing, income and
employment.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
Several lawyers reported being harassed and
ill-treated while visiting their clients in police
detention centres and performing their
professional duties.
Lawyers Marzpet Avagyan and Emanuel
Ananyan described how on 9 February a
group of police officers insulted, kicked and
punched them at the police department of
Yerevan. The lawyers alleged that they were
assaulted while defending the rights of their
clients who were minors and had also been
subjected to torture or other ill-treatment by
the same police officers.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Discrimination against LGBTI people and
social stigma based on a person’s real or
perceived sexuality remained commonplace.
In its report adopted in March, ECRI noted
that LGBTI people in Armenia continued to
face discrimination, marginalization, attacks
and bullying. It recommended swift adoption
of legal sanctions for discrimination on all
grounds, including sexual orientation and

83

gender identity, removing the stigma of
mental disorder from same-sex sexual
orientation, and countering other forms of
homophobic discourse.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In February, authorities announced that
production at the Almusar gold mine would
resume despite outstanding concerns about
potential environmental damage. Activists
opposing the project continued to be
harassed, including through lawsuits seeking
excessive financial compensation for their
environmental criticism.

DEATH PENALTY
In October, Armenia ratified Protocol No. 13
of the European Convention on Human
Rights, thereby completing abolition of the
death penalty in all circumstances, including
for crimes committed in times of war and
imminent threat of war.

AUSTRALIA
Australia
Discrimination against Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples remained
entrenched. Children as young as 10 were
imprisoned. Thousands of refugees were
able to apply for permanent residency, and
indefinite detention of asylum seekers was
found unlawful. New laws were adopted
restricting the right to peaceful protest.
New fossil fuel projects were approved.

BACKGROUND
In February, the UN Subcommittee on
Prevention of Torture cancelled plans to
resume a visit to Australia, suspended in
2022, after failing to secure guarantees of
unrestricted access to all detention facilities.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
On 14 October, Australians voted in a
referendum against a constitutional
amendment to establish the Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander “Voice”, a body that

84

would have been mandated to make
representations directly to the parliament on
issues affecting First Nations peoples.1
Twenty Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people reportedly died in custody.
Rates of detention of First Nations children
declined, but they still represented over 50%
of youth detainees. Rates of incarceration of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander adults
increased despite the target to reduce it by at
least 15% by 2031.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
Children as young as 10 years old continued
to be detained. In December, the Tasmanian
government announced that the age of
criminal responsibility in the state would be
raised from 10 to 14 but not until 2029.2 The
Northern Territory and the Australian Capital
Territory raised the age of criminal
responsibility to 12 years old, but this was still
inconsistent with international standards that
recommend a minimum age of at least 14
years.
The Queensland government overrode
protections under the state’s Human Rights
Act by adopting legislation making breach of
bail of children a criminal offence and
allowing children to be detained in adult
police facilities.
A report of an official inspection into
Banksia Hill Detention Centre in Western
Australia found that “every element” of the
youth detention facility was failing, putting the
health and safety of detainees at risk. Boys
transferred from Banksia Hill continued to be
held in the maximum-security adult
Casuarina Prison. On 19 October, a 16-yearold Aboriginal boy detained there died
following a suicide attempt.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In February, in a move affecting
approximately 19,000 people, the
immigration minister announced that people
who arrived by boat before 2013 and were
granted temporary protection visas would be
eligible to apply for permanent residency.
In July, the Federal Court ruled in a case
brought by Iranian-Kurdish refugee Mostafa

The State of the World’s Human Rights

“Moz” Azimitabar, challenging the legality of
his 14-month-long detention in hotels, that it
was lawful for the government to detain
asylum seekers in “alternative places of
detention” but it lacked humanity.
In November, a landmark High Court
decision found indefinite immigration
detention was unlawful and unconstitutional
in cases where there is no real prospect of
detainees being removed from Australia,
leading to the release of at least 148 people.3
The government immediately passed
emergency legislation imposing curfews on
and requiring those released to wear tracking
devices. In December, another law was
passed enabling the Government to re-detain
those released if they pose any risk of
committing serious offences. Seven of those
released were re-arrested.
The government maintained the policy of
turning back boats carrying asylum seekers,
or processing offshore those who arrive
without a valid visa. In September, border
forces transferred 11 asylum seekers to
immigration detention centres in Nauru
under these policies, marking the first such
transfer in nine years.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
On 18 May, South Australia adopted a law
providing for a three-month prison sentence
or a fine of AUD 50,000 (approximately USD
31,000) for “intentionally or recklessly”
obstructing a public place. Anti-protest laws
were used in several states against peaceful
climate protesters and those protesting in
support of Palestinian rights.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
The federal government strengthened the
Safeguard Mechanism to limit emissions from
Australia’s largest industrial polluters. In
November, a treaty was signed with Tuvalu
that includes provisions for migration
pathways for those threatened by climate
change and financial support for Tuvalu’s
climate adaptation plans. However, the
government continued to approve new fossil
fuel projects.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

1. “Australia: Heartbreaking result as Voice referendum ‘No’ votes
prevail”, 14 October
2. “Australia: Safer future for Tasmanian children as age of criminal
responsibility raised to 14 without exception”, 6 December
3. “Australia: Amnesty International welcomes high court ruling of
indefinite detention as unlawful and unconstitutional”, 9 November

AUSTRIA
Republic of Austria
Social security provisions remained
insufficient. Access to safe and affordable
abortion was limited. Unaccompanied
children seeking international protection
remained inadequately protected.
Parliament approved the establishment of a
police oversight body, amid concerns
regarding its independence. Police
prevented journalists from observing and
reporting protests. Police accountability for
unlawful use of force remained inadequate.
Climate action was insufficient to meet
Austria’s targets.

RIGHT TO SOCIAL SECURITY
In June, the government presented measures
to alleviate the cost-of-living crisis, including
providing increased support to families
experiencing poverty and/or beneficiaries of
social assistance. However, despite ongoing
calls by civil society to adopt a new Basic Act
on Social Assistance compliant with human
rights law and standards, no structural
legislative changes were adopted to
sufficiently fulfil the right to an adequate
standard of living for beneficiaries.1 In March,
the Constitutional Court declared a provision
of the Viennese means-tested benefits
unconstitutional as it contradicted the current
Basic Act on Social Assistance.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
Despite calls by NGOs, the government failed
to adopt a national housing strategy. Although
the city of Vienna expanded the capacity of
emergency shelters, availability remained
insufficient to meet needs.

85

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS

DISCRIMINATION

By year’s end 26 women had been killed in
suspected femicides, amid concerns
regarding the lack of sustainable strategies to
prevent such violence. Abortion had not been
fully decriminalized. Access to affordable and
safe abortion was limited due to its exclusion
from the healthcare system.
Reforms to the care system presented by
the Ministry of Social Affairs in June still
failed to grant fair remuneration and social
security to live-in care workers, the majority
of whom were migrant women.

Law enforcement continued to use facial
recognition technology without a clear legal
basis, despite its potential discriminatory
impact.
Austria failed to ensure human-rights
compliant anti-discrimination legislation at
federal and regional levels.
According to two NGOs, there was a rise in
the number of reported antisemitic and antiMuslim incidents during the year.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
At several protests in Vienna, the capital,
police prevented journalists from observing
and reporting protests.
Decision-makers publicly suggested
criminalizing climate activists for their forms
of protest and civil disobedience, in particular
for blocking streets.
On 11 October, police banned a proPalestinian protest in Vienna, citing national
security concerns. Despite the ban, the
protest took place.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In October, a freedom of information law was
proposed that fell short of international
standards because it exempted most
municipalities from an active obligation to
publish information of general interest.
There was a worrying increase in the
number of attacks on press freedom and
strategic litigation against public participation
(SLAPP) suits against journalists and human
rights activists.2

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In the context of ongoing disappearances of
unaccompanied asylum-seeking children,
Austria still failed to adopt federal provisions
ensuring guardianship for such minors on
their arrival, despite an existing legislative
proposal by the Ministry of Justice.
In June, the European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture described conditions for
migrants awaiting deportation as appalling,
dilapidated and dirty.3

86

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
In June, the European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture expressed concern
about prison conditions, including mental
healthcare provision, the use of solitary
confinement and the treatment of juveniles.

UNLAWFUL USE OF FORCE
Police accountability for unlawful use of force
remained inadequate. In March, the police
used pepper spray and batons unnecessarily
and disproportionately against climate
activists at a protest in Vienna. Parliament
approved a police oversight body to be
established in 2024, although there were
concerns over its independence. Police were
still not required to wear identification
badges, which continued to impede
accountability.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
Austria’s Federal Administrative Court had no
formal leadership throughout the year. Other
high functions within the judiciary also
remained vacant due to suspected cronyism.
The Minister of Justice remained
responsible for instructing prosecutors in
ongoing proceedings.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Austria’s climate action, including the
sustainable reduction of carbon emissions,
was not on track to reach its targets. The
government also failed to adopt a climate
action law.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

1. Austria: The Basic Act on Social Assistance in Austria: A Step Back
for Human Rights, 17 October (German only)
2. “Austria: SLAPP lawsuit against SOS Balkanroute dismissed: Success
for civil society in Austria”, 19 July (German only)
3. “Austria: Council of Europe criticizes prison conditions in Austria:
Amnesty International calls for reforms”, 27 June (German only)

AZERBAIJAN
Republic of Azerbaijan
Azerbaijan’s blockade of a key route into the
breakaway territory of Nagorno-Karabakh
endangered the lives of thousands of people
and, followed by a military offensive, forced
most of the ethnic Armenians to flee the
region. The government’s crackdown on
freedom of expression intensified.
Journalists, human rights defenders and
activists were arrested in retaliation for their
work. Peaceful protests were suppressed,
and the work of media outlets and
independent organizations remained unduly
restricted. Women and girls continued to
face gender-based harassment and
violence.

BACKGROUND
On 19 September, Azerbaijan launched a
major military offensive to disarm and
disband the de facto authorities in the
breakaway territory of Nagorno-Karabakh.
Within hours its forces had regained control
over the whole region, and within a few days
in September and October more than
100,000 people – almost all of NagornoKarabakh’s ethnic Armenian population –
had fled to Armenia.1 Those displaced faced
economic hardships and uncertainty as no
significant progress had been made by
Azerbaijan to ensure their right to return in
safety and dignity by year’s end (see Armenia
entry).
Azerbaijani authorities promised amnesty to
those who had fought for the de facto
authorities in Nagorno-Karabakh, except
alleged perpetrators of war crimes. Several of
Nagorno-Karabakh’s ethnic Armenian leaders
were arrested and charged with war crimes

The State of the World’s Human Rights

as they tried to leave the region for Armenia.
In December, Azerbaijan freed 32 Armenian
prisoners of war after agreeing to work
towards a peace deal with Armenia. The
agreement also paved the way for Azerbaijan
to host COP29, the global climate summit to
be held in November 2024.
The authorities used the military victory to
further cement their rule and entrench their
clampdown on dissent.
Azerbaijan’s human rights record was
reviewed in the UN Human Rights Council’s
UPR in November.2

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
For nine months prior to the military offensive
in September, Azerbaijan’s blockade of the
Lachin corridor, a road connecting NagornoKarabakh to Armenia, caused critical
shortages of basic necessities including food,
medicines and fuel, and a humanitarian
crisis in the breakaway region. In February,
the International Court of Justice ordered
“unimpeded movement” in both directions,
but this was ignored. Azerbaijani authorities
insisted that Nagorno-Karabakh be supplied
from territory controlled by Azerbaijan or that
supplies from Armenia be subjected to
thorough inspections, which the Armenian
side rejected.3
No substantive progress was reported in
investigating alleged war crimes and
violations of international humanitarian law in
previous years, including disproportionate
and indiscriminate attacks by Azerbaijani
military forces as well as credible evidence of
violence, including killings, of civilians and
prisoners of war by Azerbaijani forces.
Impunity for these crimes continued to
underline ongoing concerns over the
Azerbaijani authorities’ commitment to
ensure protection of civilians in NagornoKarabakh.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION
Restrictive NGO legislation continued to
impose barriers such as arbitrary denial of

87

registration and restrictions over securing
funding for human rights groups.
The media remained severely restricted.
Government critics, journalists, media
representatives and human rights defenders
faced increased instances of violence,
harassment and arbitrary arrests. Azerbaijani
human rights organizations reported that the
number of individuals jailed under politically
motivated charges had doubled compared
with the previous year, to more than 230
people.
A new restrictive media law adopted in
2022 required media outlets to register with
the authorities. From November, the Media
Development Agency of the Republic of
Azerbaijan was reported to have begun legal
action to close independent media entities
that had been denied registration on arbitrary
grounds.
Bakhtiyar Hajiyev, an opposition activist,
remained imprisoned since his detention in
December 2022 on politically motivated
charges. In March, he ended a hunger strike
shortly after intimate photographs, videos and
conversations with women were leaked from
his social media accounts.
Gubad Ibadoghlu, a renowned academic
and anti-corruption activist, was arbitrarily
arrested by plain-clothes police officers on 23
July in the capital, Baku, on fabricated
charges of “religious extremism” and
“acquiring or selling counterfeit money”. He
was detained together with his wife (who was
later released) shortly after helping set up a
foundation aimed at benefiting students by
seeking funding from assets confiscated
under anti-corruption legislation. Gubad
Ibadoghlu’s health deteriorated due to prison
conditions and lack of adequate healthcare.4
More than a dozen activists were reportedly
detained under administrative proceedings in
September and October for criticizing the
government and its military operations in
Nagorno-Karabakh. Five men were arrested
for posting anti-war content on social media.
Three others – Nurlan Gahramanli, Emin
Ibrahimov and Nemet Abbasov – were given
30 days’ administrative detention for
purportedly disseminating harmful

88

information and disobeying the police.
Afiaddin Mammadov, a trade union leader,
was arrested on fabricated charges of
physical assault carrying up to five years in
prison and remained in pretrial detention at
year’s end.
In November and December, ahead of snap
presidential elections expected in February
2024, police arrested at least 13 people on
charges that appeared to be fabricated in
retaliation for their criticism of the authorities.
Prominent opposition politician Tofig Yagublu
was arrested for allegedly falsifying
documents. Abzas Media director Ulvi
Hasanli, his colleagues Sevinj Vagifgizi,
Nargiz Absalamova and Mahammad Kekalov,
and investigative journalist Hafiz Babali were
jailed on charges of smuggling after Abzas
Media reported allegations of government
corruption. Independent journalists Teymur
Karimov, Ibrahim Humbatov, Arshad
Ibrahimov, Aziz Orujov and Rufat Muradli, as
well as activists Mohyaddin Orujov and
Ilhamiz Guliyev, were arrested on charges
ranging from illegal construction to
possession of drugs and extortion.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
The authorities continued to arbitrarily restrict
the right to peaceful assembly. On 20 June
police violently broke up a peaceful
environmental protest in the village of
Söyüdlü, Gadabay district, by local activists
demonstrating against the planned expansion
of a gold mine. Footage showed police
beating protesters with truncheons and
spraying a chemical irritant directly into the
faces of several women protesters.
Approximately 10 people were injured and a
dozen were temporarily detained during the
protest and its aftermath. This included at
least three journalists briefly detained and
beaten by the police while covering the
protests and several activists arrested
following the protests for their critical social
media posts. Police also reportedly blocked
access to Söyüdlü from 22 June for at least
three weeks, allowing only residents and progovernment media outlets to enter.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Women continued to face various forms of
gender-based violence, including being
targeted as instruments of political revenge.
Local women activists raised concerns
about the safety and security of several
women whose intimate photographs, videos
and messages were leaked from the private
accounts of arrested opposition activist
Bakhtiyar Hajiyev (see above, Freedom of
expression and association). The activists
accused the government of being behind the
leaks and making those women targets of
violence, including from their own families,
by releasing their names, images and, in one
case, their home address. The investigation
into the alleged cybercrime was ongoing at
the end of the year.
1. Azerbaijan: As Azerbaijani forces assume full control over NagornoKarabakh, it must respect and protect the rights of local ethnic
Armenians, 29 September
2. Suggested Recommendations to States under Review in the 44th
session of the UPR Working Group, 06 November 2023 – 17 November
2023, 14 September
3. “Azerbaijan: Blockade of Lachin corridor putting thousands of lives in
peril must be immediately lifted”, 9 February
4. “Azerbaijan: Authorities must immediately release prominent scholar
Gubad Ibadoghlu”, 7 September

BAHRAIN
Kingdom of Bahrain
The rights of people deprived of their liberty
were violated, although reports of torture
and other ill-treatment declined compared
to previous years. Authorities continued to
harass and prosecute their critics, repressed
some peaceful protests and twice blocked
Shia Muslims from reaching the main Shia
mosque in Bahrain.

BACKGROUND
In March, Bahrain hosted an assembly of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union, a body bringing
together elected legislatures from around the
world. In late August, Bahrain invited
members of OHCHR, the UN human rights

The State of the World’s Human Rights

office, to visit the country, then cancelled the
visit on 13 September, the day before it was
to begin. The same day, Bahrain signed a
new agreement to bolster military and
commercial ties with the USA.
On 15 September, at a UK airport, Bahraini
authorities prevented a delegation, including
exiled human rights activist Maryam AlKhawaja and leaders from Amnesty
International, Front Line Defenders and
ActionAid Denmark, from boarding a flight to
Bahrain.1

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
Until September, authorities at Jaw Prison
kept inmates in their cells 23 hours a day
and prevented hundreds of Shia prisoners
convicted of violent or non-violent opposition
to the government from holding group
religious ceremonies in the prison prayer
room, a restriction not applied to other
prisoners. The prison administration
continued at times to arbitrarily and punitively
cancel prisoners’ phone calls and visits.
Between 7 August and 11 September,
hundreds of Shia prisoners staged a hunger
strike to protest at these forms of illtreatment, which are contrary to the UN
Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment
of Prisoners. The prison authorities
subsequently agreed to allow prisoners two
hours a day out of their cells, group prayers
twice a day in groups of up to 50 in the
prayer room, and more calls and visits under
better conditions.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Reports of torture and other ill-treatment
declined compared to previous years.
On 15 August, guards at Jaw Prison peppersprayed and beat prisoner Ahmed Jaafar for
demanding to meet a higher-ranking officer
to discuss the hunger strikers’ demands.
Throughout most of the year, the prison
authorities denied adequate medical
treatment to imprisoned human rights
defender Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja, arbitrarily
cancelling his hospital appointments or
making him wait for appointments for hours

89

while shackled in a windowless, unventilated
vehicle without air conditioning.2

UNFAIR TRIALS
On 26 September, a court convicted 13 out
of 65 defendants in a mass trial of prisoners
for allegedly assaulting guards at Jaw Prison
on 17 April 2021. Leaked contemporaneous
accounts by at least five prisoners, and
accounts given under interrogation by at least
four, stated that guards attacked prisoners,
not the other way around.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
In July, Bahrain’s royally appointed upper
legislative chamber proposed a legal upper
limit of BHD 120 (USD 320) per month for
domestic workers’ salaries. Like other migrant
workers, domestic workers continued to lack
the protection of a minimum wage.
Even though the effects of climate change
began to be felt, with Bahrain experiencing
its hottest August in over 100 years, the
government did not revise its inadequate
rules on heat protection, increasing the
health risks for outdoor workers exposed to
heat stress.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Bahrain remained one of the world’s top five
highest emitters of CO2 per capita, according
to World Bank data. Bahrain’s current
Nationally Determined Contribution plan
under the UN Framework Convention on
Climate Change, which it set in October
2021, makes no reference to reaching net
zero greenhouse gas emissions, stating only a
“renewable energy target” of “10% by 2025”.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Bahraini authorities continued to harass and
unjustly prosecute their critics.
On 30 March, a court convicted three
members of an unorthodox religious group,
the Altajdeed Society, for “insulting” Islamic
figures and sentenced them to one year’s
imprisonment. After an appeals court upheld
the verdict on 21 May, authorities arrested
the two defendants still living in Bahrain.

90

On 22 May, police summoned a Shia cleric,
Mohamed Sanqoor, for giving a sermon
criticizing what he described as inhumane
treatment of prisoners. Authorities
interrogated him for three days, releasing him
without charge on 25 May.
On 20 December, authorities detained
opposition activist Ebrahim Sharif for tweets
condemning the government’s policy on
Israel, Palestine, the USA and the Red Sea.
They released him on 27 December,
suspending prosecution without dropping the
charges.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
In June, security forces twice prevented Shia
Bahrainis from reaching the Imam al-Sadiq
mosque in al-Duraz for Friday prayers if they
were not residents of the town. This mosque
is the country’s foremost Shia place of
worship. Police blockades on the roads into
al-Duraz turned back Shia commuters from
other areas, while allowing non-Shia travellers
to pass, on 9 and 16 June, three weeks after
Mohamed Sanqoor was arrested (see above).

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
The government reacted inconsistently to
peaceful protests, repressing some but not
others.
Authorities did not act to prevent or break
up periodic marches and other street protests
in the Shia-majority suburban areas to the
west of the capital, Manama. Several such
marches during the August-September
prisoners’ hunger strike approached without
repression the Budaiya Highway, which was
an important axis during the mass protests of
2011.
However, on other occasions, the
government summoned, warned, intimidated
and arrested actual or potential protesters. In
February, for example, the government
summoned several family members of
Bahrainis imprisoned or killed in the past by
government forces and warned them against
protesting around the anniversary of the
2011 uprising. On 21 February, the police
station in Sanabis, a Shia suburb of Manama,
summoned Jameel Taher al-Samea, the

The State of the World’s Human Rights

father of a young man executed in 2017, and
compelled him to sign a statement pledging
not to join any demonstrations. On 5 March,
police arrested Hajer Mansoor, Ali Muhana,
Muneer Mushaima and Najah Yusuf – all
former prisoners or family members of
prisoners – for peacefully protesting next to
Bahrain’s Formula 1 racetrack. They were
released after several hours without charge.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
In June, in a positive step, Bahrain annulled
Article 353 of its Penal Code, which had
allowed rapists to escape prosecution if they
married their victims.
There was no change to Article 4 of the Law
on Bahraini Nationality, under which only
men can pass on their Bahraini nationality to
their children.
1. “Bahrain: Maryam Al-Khawaja prevented from boarding flight for
visit to demand father’s release”, 15 September
2. “Bahrain: Prisoner of conscience on hunger strike: Abdulhadi AlKhawaja”, 17 August

BANGLADESH
People’s Republic of Bangladesh
The government intensified its crackdown
on the rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly ahead of general
elections scheduled for January 2024.
Authorities used the powers in the Digital
Security Act and other legislation to target
journalists and human rights defenders,
subjecting them to arbitrary detention and
torture. There was a concerning increase in
enforced disappearances and lack of
accountability for deaths in custody.
Occupational safety remained a distant
dream for many workers. Refugees endured
homelessness due to a fire in a camp and a
cyclone as well as food insecurity. Rations
for refugees were restricted due to the UN’s
acute funding shortfall. Bangladesh
remained extremely vulnerable to impacts
of climate change.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

BACKGROUND
2023 marked the 15th consecutive year that
the Awami League remained the ruling
political party.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In September, the draconian Digital Security
Act (DSA) was repealed and replaced with
the almost identical Cyber Security Act (CSA),
following tokenistic consultation.1 Authorities
had weaponized the DSA to threaten and
silence thousands of journalists and critics,
restricting liberty and rights to privacy as well
as freedom of expression. The CSA retained
many of the repressive features of the DSA,
including verbatim all but two of the DSA
offences, albeit with some reductions to the
maximum sentences, maintaining broad
powers of arrest and investigation.2
JOURNALISTS
Journalists faced increasing attacks and
prosecutions amid a deepening crisis for
press freedom and a growing culture of zero
tolerance for dissent more broadly.
In April, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina
labelled Prothom Alo – the country’s largest
daily newspaper – “an enemy of the Awami
League, democracy, and the people of
Bangladesh” in parliament. Hours later, a
group of individuals barged into the
newspaper’s office in the capital, Dhaka,
issuing threats and vandalizing its logo.3 This
was in reaction to an article by journalist
Shamsuzzaman Shams, published by the
media outlet on 26 March, Independence
Day, covering the cost of living crisis in
Bangladesh.
On 29 March, Shamsuzzaman Shams was
arbitrarily arrested and detained under the
DSA for publishing “defamatory, false and
fabricated information”. He was initially
denied bail and jailed. Although released on
bail on 3 April, if convicted he could face up
to seven years’ imprisonment.
In June, journalist Golam Rabbani was
beaten to death by a group of men armed
with machetes and steel bars. The attack
came hours after a local court dismissed a
case filed against Golam Rabbani under the
DSA by the then Sadhurpara union council

91

chairman, who was also a member of the
ruling party. Golam Rabbani’s family alleged
he was killed in retaliation for a series of
reports he authored on the chairman, which
also prompted the DSA case.
WOMEN AND GIRLS
The DSA was used to punish individuals with
links to critical voices in the diaspora. In
November, Khadijatul Kubra, a second-year
university student, was finally granted bail
after spending over 14 months in arbitrary
pretrial detention under the DSA, in
connection with critical statements made
against the government by a guest speaker
during a webinar she had moderated when
aged 17. Khadijatul Kubra was repeatedly
denied bail by the Supreme Court, which
stated she should take responsibility for the
views expressed on her talk show.4
In August, the police arbitrarily arrested and
detained 58-year-old Anisha Siddika on
charges of “sabotage” against the
government under the authoritarian Special
Powers Act. This came three days after
Anisha Siddika’s son, who lives in the USA,
published a Facebook post critical of the
ruling party. While in police custody, Anisha
Siddika was ordered to remove her face veil
before police forcibly photographed her and
posted it on their Facebook page. She also
alleged that she was denied food and the
opportunity to pray for 12 hours while in
custody.5
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In September, a cyber tribunal sentenced
Adilur Rahman Khan and A.S.M. Nasiruddin
Elan, leaders of human rights organization
Odhikar, to two years’ imprisonment under
Section 57 of the draconian Information and
Communication Technology Act 2006.
Odhikar had published a fact-finding report
documenting extrajudicial killings conducted
by the state in response to a protest in 2013.
The two men had endured a decade of
persecution, intimidation and harassment by
the state and were denied their right to fair
trial. The state’s relentless crackdown on
Odhikar and its leaders had a chilling effect

92

on civil society, especially those documenting
violations of human rights.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
Authorities used unlawful force coupled with
widespread arrests to curb opposition-led
protests throughout the year. Police
unlawfully used rubber bullets and tear gas
against largely peaceful protesters at a sit-in
on 29 July in Dhaka. Law enforcement
representatives beat unarmed protesters and
fired tear gas near a hospital, while officers in
civilian clothes used unlawful force against
protesters.6 Ahead of the protest, on 28 July,
more than 500 opposition leaders and
activists were arrested. The police boarded
buses entering Dhaka and conducted
searches of people’s phones to prevent
individuals from joining opposition rallies.
In an earlier protest on 18 July, the
authorities used live bullets against protesters
resulting in at least one death.7 The police
filed cases against over 12,000 unnamed
and 1,036 named opposition activists in 14
districts. As opposition-led protests
intensified, at least 1,727 opposition activists
were arrested in Dhaka between 21 and 28
October, including the secretary general of
the largest opposition party.
In August, Mominul Islam Jishan and five
other leaders of the student wing of the main
opposition party were picked up from
Mominul Islam Jishan’s home by a group of
men in civilian clothing who identified
themselves as members of the Detective
Branch of the police. Their whereabouts
remained unknown for over 24 hours before
the police told the press that the six men
were held under the authoritarian Special
Powers Act and Arms Act.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES AND
EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
Odhikar estimated 24 extrajudicial killings
and 52 enforced disappearances in 2023,
compared to 31 extrajudicial killings and 21
enforced disappearances in 2022.
In May, Ikramul Haque, a madrasa teacher,
his wife, Anika Faria, and their six-month-old
son were brought before a court in Dhaka in

The State of the World’s Human Rights

an anti-terrorism case, one month after they
were detained by the police. Their family told
media that their whereabouts remained
unknown during that period. The police
denied the allegation of enforced
disappearance and accused the couple of
being recruiters for the banned militant group
Ansar-al-Islam.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Bangladesh failed to submit its report to the
UN Committee against Torture, due in
August.
Custodial deaths continued to be reported
in the media with alarming frequency.
Odhikar estimated at least 94 deaths in jail
custody in the first nine months of the year.
Authorities failed to ensure prompt, effective,
impartial and independent investigations into
deaths in custody.
In March, Sultana Jasmine, a government
employee detained under the DSA died in
custody due to internal bleeding in her head.
The Supreme Court ordered a probe
committee to be formed to investigate her
death after finding inconsistencies in the
official post-mortem report. The case
remained ongoing.
In June, Ekramul Hossain, a farmer, died in
police custody after being detained on drug
related charges, although no drugs were
found in his possession. His family alleged
that the police tortured him in custody
because they were unable to pay the
demanded bribe. The police refuted this,
claiming that Ekramul Hossain “tripped and
fell” when trying to flee.
In July, a court in the north-western Natore
district ordered the Superintendent of Police
to prosecute five police officers accused of
torturing three men to extract confessions in
a robbery case. The Superintendent refuted
the torture allegation by asserting that the
men “fell and hurt themselves” when trying
to escape from the police. The investigation
order was later stayed by a higher court,
while two of the police officers accused of
torture were awarded prizes for “best police
officers of the month” 10 days later by Natore
police.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
April marked 10 years since the Rana Plaza
collapse, which left more than 1,100 garment
workers dead and thousands injured. Despite
the reforms that followed, occupational safety
remained a distant dream for many workers.
The Safety and Rights Society estimated that
at least 875 workers were killed in 712
workplace accidents in 2023, marking a rise
from 712 deaths recorded in 2022.
In June, the president of the Bangladesh
Garments and Industrial Workers’ Federation
was beaten to death by a group of armed
men outside a factory where he was
intervening on behalf of workers over a
dispute relating to unpaid wages.
In October and November, at least three
workers were killed in protests relating to the
national minimum wage for ready-made
garment (RMG) workers due to lethal force
used by law enforcement. RMG workers
called for their monthly wage to be increased
from BDT 8,000 (USD 74) to at least BDT
23,000 (USD 212). However, in November,
the government announced that the
minimum wage would increase to only BDT
12,500 (USD 114).
In November, the government amended the
labour law to increase maternity leave from
112 days to 120 days and lower the number
of workers’ signatures required for the
formation of trade unions. Workers’ rights
groups demanded the withdrawal of the
Essential Services Bill tabled in parliament.
The proposed law would render industrial
action by workers – such as protests –
unlawful in any sector deemed “essential” by
the government.
Authorities weaponized labour laws to
launch a criminal prosecution against 83year-old Nobel Laureate Mohammad Yunus
and three of his colleagues at Grameen
Telecom, alleging non-compliance with the
Labour Act 2006. The ongoing trial
proceeded with unusual speed and was one
of more than 150 cases filed against
Mohammad Yunus since the Awami League
party came into power in 2008, with the
prime minister, Sheikh Hasina publicly
denigrating him on many occasions.8

93

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Bangladesh continued to host over 1 million
Rohingya refugees in camps in poor
conditions for the sixth consecutive year.
In March, a devastating fire destroyed
around 2,000 shelters and left around
12,000 Rohingya refugees homeless.9 In
May, cyclone Mocha, made worse by climate
change, destroyed camp infrastructure and
dwellings. In June, the UN announced that
an acute funding shortfall forced the World
Food Programme to further slash the value of
refugees’ monthly rations from USD 12 to
USD 8. Days later, tens of thousands of
Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh launched a
protest demanding to be repatriated to
Myanmar, citing their dire situation.
The UN Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in Myanmar urged
Bangladesh to suspend its pilot repatriation
project given the continuing risk for returning
refugees.
In July, an ICC prosecutor visited the camps
to collect testimony from refugees to aid the
court’s investigation against the Myanmar
military for genocide. Mohammad Ebadullah,
a junior refugee camp warden who was
assembling refugees to testify, was stabbed to
death just before the prosecutor arrived in
the camps. Six other refugees were killed the
day after his visit. While the ICC prosecutor
told press that these killings were unrelated
to the court’s investigation, they underscored
the deteriorating security in the camps.
On a positive note, in July, UNICEF
announced that a record number of 300,000
Rohingya refugee children were enrolled for
the 2023/24 school year.
1. “Bangladesh: Government must remove draconian provisions from
the Draft Cyber Security Act”, 31 August
2. “Bangladesh: Open letter to the government: Feedback on proposed
‘Cyber Security Act’”, 22 August
3. “Bangladesh: Increasing intimidation and harassment of Prothom
Alo signals deepening crisis of press freedom in the country”, 12
April
4. “Student detained for a year for hosting webinar: Khadijatul Kubra”,
25 August
5. “Bangladesh: Woman arrested after her son’s Facebook post must be
immediately released”, 23 August

94

6. “Bangladesh: Unlawful use of force against protesters must end
immediately”, 4 August
7. “Bangladesh: Authorities must exercise restraint in use of force to
police protests”, 19 July
8. “Bangladesh: Stop weaponizing labour law to harass Nobel Laureate
Mohammad Yunus”, 18 September
9. “Bangladesh: Urgent emergency measures must aid all impacted by
fire in Rohingya refugee camps”, 6 March

BELARUS
Republic of Belarus
The rights to freedom of expression,
association and peaceful assembly
remained severely curtailed. Religious
minorities faced discrimination. The justice
system was abused to suppress dissent.
Torture and other ill-treatment were
endemic and impunity prevailed. Refugees
and migrants suffered abuses at the hands
of the authorities. Death sentences
continued to be imposed.

BACKGROUND
Belarus’s international isolation deepened,
and its EU neighbours tightened border
controls after Belarus agreed to host the
Russian private military company Wagner
and deploy Russian tactical nuclear weapons
on its territory.
Some 350,000 people were estimated to
have left Belarus since the crackdown on
dissent in 2020, leading to workforce
shortages. Authorities attempted to force
many to return, including by halting passport
renewals at Belarussian consulates abroad.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Freedom of expression remained severely
restricted. In May, amendments to the
criminal code made it even easier for
authorities to mount criminal prosecutions for
“crimes of an anti-state orientation” and
introduced criminal liability for “discrediting”
the armed forces and other government
forces including paramilitaries.
Books and other printed products continued
to be outlawed for featuring “extremist

The State of the World’s Human Rights

content” and dozens of people were arrested
every month for subscribing to “extremist”
Telegram messenger channels.
In January, Darya Losik was sentenced to
two years’ imprisonment for “assisting
extremist activity” because of an interview
about her husband, prisoner of conscience
Ihar Losik, on the Belsat television channel in
2022. She was accused of describing her
husband as “a political prisoner” and
protesting his innocence.
Belarusian courts continued to sentence
individuals for “insulting” officials,
“discrediting” state institutions and symbols,
or “inciting animosity and enmity”.
In May, leading cultural figure Pavel Belavus
was sentenced to 13 years’ imprisonment
and a fine of BYN 18,500 (USD 5,500) on
four criminal charges, including treason and
“leading an extremist formation”. Among
other things, he was accused of “spreading
ideas of Belarusian nationalism aimed at
changing the state power”.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
The crackdown on independent civil society
organizations, NGOs, professional
organizations and ethnic and religious
communities intensified. All 12 parties
opposed to the government were refused reregistration and dissolved in an attempt to
clear the field for elections in 2024.
Arbitrary charges of “extremism” were used
to close civil society organizations, such as
the human rights centre Viasna which in
August was deemed an “extremist
formation”.
Individuals were arrested for “financing
extremist activities or organizations”. Kiryl
Klimau was sentenced to four years’
imprisonment for sending six donations of
USD 10 to charities supporting the victims of
political repression.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
From October, as part of a wide-ranging
crackdown on dissent, all religious
organizations were required to undergo reregistration or face closure.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Repression continued against Catholic
priests. Starting on 31 May, Uladzislau
Beladzed was arrested three consecutive
times, each for 15 days, for “spreading
extremist materials”. During a search of the
Catholic cathedral in the capital Minsk, where
he was serving, security forces reportedly
beat several priests.
Authorities continued to persecute the New
Life protestant church. In June, their church
building was demolished. In August, two
online publications from 2020 condemning
violence against peaceful protesters were
labelled “extremist” and two pastors were
arrested. In October, the church was
“liquidated” by a court decision because of
“extremist activities”.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
The right to freedom of peaceful assembly
remained severely restricted. Three years
after the 2020 protests, the authorities
continued to track down for unfounded
prosecution and imprisonment both peaceful
participants and those who supported them,
including with donations.

UNFAIR TRIALS
The authorities continued to abuse the justice
system to crack down on all dissent,
including political opponents, human rights
defenders and lawyers. In March, Sviatlana
Tsikhanouskaya, Pavel Latushka, Maria
Maroz, Volha Kavalkova and Siarhei Dyleuski
were sentenced in their absence under
trumped-up charges to between 12 and 18
years’ imprisonment. The practice of closed
hearings remained widespread.
The persecution of lawyers defending
victims of politically motivated prosecution
continued, with a human rights group
reporting that at least 10 lawyers were
imprisoned and more than 100 disbarred or
refused extension of their licence in
retaliation for performing their professional
duties.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment remained
widespread and endemic with perpetrators

95

enjoying impunity. Individuals convicted
under politically motivated charges faced
harsh treatment and inhumane conditions,
including denial of adequate healthcare,
contact with family members and outdoor
exercise. For months at a time there was no
information about the whereabouts and
condition of Syarhei Tsikhanouski, Maryia
Kalesnikava, Ihar Losik, Maksim Znak,
Mikalai Statkevich, Viktar Babaryka and other
imprisoned high-profile activists, journalists
and politicians.
In July, imprisoned artist Ales Pushkin died,
reportedly from an untreated perforated
ulcer, in the city of Hrodna. He had been
serving a five-year sentence imposed
after unfounded charges.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The authorities continued to prevent human
rights defenders from carrying out their work,
including through arbitrary detention.
In March, members of prominent human
rights organization Viasna, Ales Bialiatski,
Valiantsin Stefanovic and Uladzimir
Labkovich, were sentenced to 10, nine and
seven years’ imprisonment respectively,
on false charges.1
Nasta Loika was sentenced on trumped-up
charges to seven years’ imprisonment in a
closed trial in June. Her name was added to
the list of individuals involved in “terrorist
activities”.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Belarusian authorities continued to lure
refugees and migrants to Belarus with a false
promise of easy passage into the EU, then
violently forced them across EU borders
where they also faced pushbacks by Poland,
Lithuania, and Latvia. Refugees and migrants
at the border often faced torture and other illtreatment by Belarusian authorities.

DEATH PENALTY
Death sentences continued, but no
executions were reported.
New provisions in the criminal code,
adopted in May, extended the application of
the death penalty to treason by “officials in

96

responsible positions”, state officials and
military officers.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
According to the WHO, fine particulate air
pollution in Belarus, mainly from vehicle
emissions, was three times greater than the
organization’s recommended safe limit and
was responsible for 18% of deaths from
stroke and ischaemic heart disease. The
country’s climate policies were incompatible
with its obligations under the Paris
Agreement.
1. “Belarus: Sentencing of human rights defenders a ‘blatant
retaliation’ for their work”, 3 March

BELGIUM
Kingdom of Belgium
Asylum seekers were left destitute and
Afghan asylum seekers were denied
international protection. New care centres
for survivors of sexual violence were
opened. The government withdrew its
proposed ban on attending demonstrations
as punishment for certain protest-related
crimes. Climate activists were found guilty
of trespassing following a peaceful action.
Prisoners were detained in inhumane
conditions. The Wallonia region continued
to make irresponsible arms transfers.
Municipalities’ regulation of begging
violated human rights.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Although the government partially increased
the capacity of its reception system,
authorities again left thousands of asylum
seekers homeless and destitute by denying
them access to accommodation. Despite
thousands of court decisions, including
decisions by the state’s highest administrative
court and the European Court of Human
Rights, the government failed to solve the
reception crisis caused by its continued
failure to provide sufficient shelter capacity.1

The State of the World’s Human Rights

The Commissioner General for Refugees
and Stateless Persons continued to deny
international protection to the majority of
Afghan asylum seekers, with only 35%
obtaining protection. Almost all Afghans
remained unable to return to Afghanistan and
failed asylum seekers were vulnerable to
abuse.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Two new care centres for survivors of sexual
violence were opened, bringing the total to
10, with four more planned. Of the survivors
seeking help at care centres, 90% identified
as women. The average age of people
seeking help was 24, and 32% of all victims
were aged under 18.

DISCRIMINATION
In July, the interior minister issued a new
“professional profiling framework of action”,
which was welcomed as a positive measure
to address and stop ethnic profiling by the
police.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
Overcrowding in dilapidated prisons
continued, with insufficient access to
essential services, including healthcare and
sanitary facilities.
In October, the Council of Europe repeated
its criticism of structural problems in the
prison system, and the lack of effective
recourse, and urged authorities to take swift
and durable measures to reduce the number
of prisoners and improve conditions of
detention.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
In December, following opposition by trade
unions and human rights groups, among
others, the government withdrew a proposal
that would have allowed judges to impose a
temporary general prohibition on participation
in public assemblies as a complementary
penalty on people convicted of protest-related
criminal offences.
In April, 22 Greenpeace activists protested
peacefully against fossil fuel investments at

The State of the World’s Human Rights

the port of Zeebrugge; 14 were arrested and
detained for 48 hours. In November, the
Bruges court of first instance found them
guilty of unlawful intrusion into the critical
infrastructure of the port facility. No
sentences were handed down.

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
The Wallonia region continued authorizing
arms transfers to states where there was a
substantial risk that they could be used to
commit or facilitate serious violations of
international human rights and humanitarian
law. This included to Brazilian police and
Nigerian and Indonesian military forces
accused of serious human rights violations.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
The Federal Institute for the Protection and
Promotion of Human Rights and the Combat
Poverty, Insecurity and Social Exclusion
Service documented that in 253 out of a total
of 581 cities and villages there were by-laws
regulating begging that contravened human
rights.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In April, a non-exhaustive inventory by the
federal government showed that the state
annually spends around €13 billion in fossil
fuels subsidies, although the actual figure
may be as high as €19 billion.
In November, the Brussels Court of Appeal
ruled that the federal, the Flemish and the
Brussels Capital Region’s authorities had
failed to implement adequate policies to
tackle the climate emergency, and thus had
violated the rights to life and to private life of
the plaintiffs.

IMPUNITY
In May, a prisoner swap led to the release
and transfer home of Belgian aid worker
Olivier Vandecasteele who had been held
hostage in Iran. The corresponding early
release and transfer to Iran of Iranian
intelligence agent Assadollah Asadi
contributed to a climate of impunity for the
extraterritorial targeting of Iranian dissidents

97

for extrajudicial execution, torture and other
ill-treatment, and undermined the rights of
victims to justice.2
1. “Belgium: Urgent action needed to end human rights violations
against asylum seekers”, 31 October
2. “Iran/Belgium: Iran must be held accountable for hostage-taking
after overdue release of Olivier Vandecasteele in prisoner swap”,26
May

BENIN
Republic of Benin
Armed groups committed unlawful killings
in the north of the country. Freedom of
expression continued to be curtailed by the
2018 Digital Code. An opposition leader
remained arbitrarily detained. The
government made progress towards the
implementation of the 2021 law legalizing
abortion. Women confined to a hospital
ward for non-payment of hospital fees were
released. Thousands of people who had
been forcibly evicted in connection with
tourism development projects continued to
demand adequate compensation.

BACKGROUND
Attacks by armed groups continued in the
Alibori and Atacora departments bordering
Niger and Burkina Faso. Around 40
inhabitants of these departments and 25
soldiers had been killed since 2019,
according to the Beninese army. In August,
127 people accused of belonging to terrorist
groups were released from prison after their
cases were dismissed. Experts from Benin’s
Fisheries and Oceanological Research
Institute warned of the risk of rising sea levels
in several parts of the country, including the
economic capital Cotonou, due to climate
change.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
President Patrice Talon ordered an
investigation into the deaths of around 15
people in attacks by armed groups on

98

inhabitants of the commune of Kérou in the
Atacora department in May.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Freedom of expression continued to be
threatened, notably by the 2018 Digital Code,
which criminalizes with imprisonment the
publishing of false information online. The
government continued to use the security
situation in the north of the country to justify
ongoing restrictions on the right to strike.
On 24 May, the Public Prosecutor’s Office
requested a 12-month prison sentence for
journalist Maxime Lissanon, who had been in
custody since 13 January for “inciting
rebellion”. He was arrested following a post
on his Facebook page during the legislative
elections on 8 January, in which he wrote
that representatives of the opposition party
Les Démocrates had been prevented from
entering polling stations.
On 15 June, Virgile Ahouansè, news
director of the online radio station Crystal
News, was given a 12-month suspended
prison sentence for “disseminating false
information”. In December 2022, he had
broadcast an investigation containing witness
statements accusing the police of
extrajudicial executions at a school in the city
of Porto-Novo.
On 8 August, the High Authority for
Audiovisual and Communication suspended
until further notice “all means of mass
communication” of the Gazette du Golfe
press group, in connection with an alleged
“apology for coups d’état”.
On 31 August, police officers in Pendjari
National Park arrested and detained Damilola
Ayeni, a journalist for the Foundation for
Investigative Journalism (FIJ), who was
working on a Nigeria-Benin environmental
report, according to FIJ. He was accused of
participating in terrorist activities and was
released nine days later without charge.
The ban on the right to strike for workers in
the air and maritime transport, and oil and
gas sectors was still in force after a law was
passed by MPs in October 2022.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Opposition leader Reckya Madougou
remained in detention despite a statement
issued by the UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention in 2022 considering her detention
arbitrary.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Martin Hounga, aged 18, was killed during a
police operation on the night of 4 September
in the city of Hêvié. On 12 September the
police announced that the case had been
referred to the public prosecutor of the
Abomey-Calavi court and to the police
technical inspector to conduct a judicial and
administrative investigation into the death.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
On 12 April, the government adopted a
decree laying down the conditions for the
implementation of voluntary abortion, which
had been expanded by law in December
2021.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In May, four women confined to a ward in the
Mènontin District Hospital since March for
non-payment of hospital fees were released
following a visit to the hospital by social
services and a delegation from the Ministry of
Health and the Ministry of Social Affairs.1

FORCED EVICTIONS
Several thousand people who had been
forcibly evicted in connection with tourism
development projects along the coast,
between the cities of Cotonou and Ouidah,
continued to complain about the lack of
adequate compensation. In many cases there
were violations of international human rights
law and Beninese law before, during and
after the evictions, regarding prior notification
and prior and fair compensation.
1. “Benin: Women and their babies deprived of their liberty for unpaid
hospital bills”, 5 May (French only)

BHUTAN
Kingdom of Bhutan
The poor detention conditions of prisoners
convicted in the 1990s on politically
motivated charges remained a concern.
Press freedom declined and women and
girls continued to face challenges to
political participation. The National
Assembly adopted the UN Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities with
four reservations.

BACKGROUND
In April, the fourth elections for the National
Council, the upper house of the bicameral
parliament, were held with a voter turnout of
54.64%. Twenty candidates were elected by
voters as representatives of the 20
Dzongkhags (districts). Bhutan and China
held their 25th round of boundary delineation
talks in October. The People’s Democratic
Party (PDP), led by former prime minister
Tshering Tobgay, and the newly formed
Bhutan Tendrel Party (BTP) emerged as the
two largest parties in the primary round of the
fourth National Assembly elections held in
November. The Druk Nyamrup Tshogpa party
led by incumbent prime minister Lotay
Tshering failed in the first round.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Civil servants remained barred from sharing
information relevant to public interest with
the media under Bhutan Civil Service Rules
and Regulations 2018 and Section 39 of
Bhutan’s 2010 Civil Service Act. Bhutan’s
press freedom ranking dropped from 33rd to
90th, according to the 2023 World Press
Freedom Index. Journalists experienced
challenges in obtaining access to state-held
information.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
At least 37 prisoners who were convicted in
the 1990s for “offences against the Tsa-WaSum (king, country and people)”, as defined
by Bhutanese law, and who were subjected

The State of the World’s Human Rights

99

to torture at the time of arrest and trial and
denied access to defence lawyers, remained
in detention in poor conditions. They received
inadequate food, heating and bedding and
were denied regular communications or visits
from their families.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Despite commitments in the National Plan of
Action to Promote Gender Equality in Elected
Offices, only nine women were registered as
candidates in the National Council elections;
one woman was elected in April. At the end
of the year, fewer than 10% of registered
candidates for the National Assembly
elections in December 2023/January 2024
were women: three each from the PDP and
the BTP.
In October, the CEDAW Committee raised
concerns about failures to address negative
gender stereotyping and the lack of women’s
political participation.
The CEDAW Committee also recommended
measures to eliminate all forms of
discrimination against ethnic minority
women.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Bhutan does not have a comprehensive
social protection policy and many people,
such as those with disabilities and LGBTI
people, faced challenges in accessing social
protection programmes.
In June, the National Assembly adopted the
UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities with four reservations. Bhutan is
the only country in the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation that has
not ratified the Convention.
The CEDAW Committee expressed concern
over the reduction in the female labour force
from 61.2% in 2019 to 53.5% in 2022 and
recommended that measures to increase
women’s access to employment be
introduced.
Youth unemployment increased from 5.5%
in 2004 to 15.7% in 2019 and remained a
challenge. A pattern continued of youth
migrating from rural to urban settings and

100

seeking employment overseas due to lack of
opportunities in Bhutan.

BOLIVIA
Plurinational State of Bolivia
Concerns persisted over the judiciary’s lack
of independence. Authorities failed to
protect human rights defenders. Victims of
human rights violations awaited reparation.
Indigenous Peoples were affected by
unregulated mining. Security forces
attacked journalists during protests.
Authorities took insufficient action to
combat forest fires.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL AND DETAINEES’
RIGHTS
The Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights visited Bolivia in March and expressed
particular concern about the judiciary’s lack
of independence from the government. In
August, the commission requested
information from the authorities on the
condition of César Apaza, ex-leader of an
association of coca leaf producers who had
been in pretrial detention since September
2022 after law enforcement officials violently
repressed protests by the association. In
September, Apaza began a hunger strike,
denouncing unfair judicial processes against
him and ill-treatment by prison authorities.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Authorities failed to protect human rights
defenders. According to local organizations,
environmental human rights defenders
remained among those most at risk.
On 2 June, dozens of people with alleged
links to the ruling political party raided and
occupied the offices of the Permanent
Assembly on Human Rights in Bolivia
(APDHB), an NGO in La Paz.1 Following the
raid, 84-year-old human rights defender and
president of the APDHB, Amparo Carvajal,
undertook a 52-day vigil outside the offices of
the organization. The authorities failed to
ensure the security and health of Carvajal

The State of the World’s Human Rights

and her colleagues during the vigil. The
Spanish consul in Bolivia facilitated a
negotiated evacuation of the groups
occupying the office, bringing the vigil to an
end.2 The normal functioning of the APDHB
had not resumed by the end of the year.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In October, the Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights published its first report
monitoring the implementation of
recommendations made by its
Interdisciplinary Group of Independent
Experts for Bolivia in response to the 2019
political crisis. At least 37 people died and
hundreds more were wounded by security
forces during the crisis. The commission
recognized some advances in support for
victims, but it noted that ongoing
investigations into grave human rights
violations had registered little progress, and a
comprehensive reparation programme had
not been implemented.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
The government announced the
implementation phase of a national plan to
reduce the exposure of Indigenous Peoples
to the unregulated disposal of mercury from
gold mining. The announcement was not
accompanied by any details on how the plan
was to be implemented. Meanwhile, the
authorities continued to permit new gold
mining projects, which raised the risk of
mercury contamination for communities
across the country.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
During January, the Ombudsperson’s Office
reported several instances of excessive use of
force by police in response to a series of
protests following the arrest of the governor of
Santa Cruz, Luis Fernando Camacho. Civil
organizations documented attacks against 75
journalists during the protests.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Despite Bolivia’s commitment to maintain its
forest cover, human rights defenders cited
inaction by authorities to abolish laws that for
years have favoured agro-industry and
extractive industries and enabled
deforestation. Defenders also highlighted
insufficient measures to prevent an intense
forest fire season – made more intense by
climate change – towards the end of the year.
1. “Bolivia: Human rights defenders at risk, 40+ days of vigil”, 19 July
2. “Bolivia: Further information: Human rights defender ends 52-day
vigil after invaders vacate occupied NGO office: Amparo Carvajal”,
1 August

BOSNIA AND
HERZEGOVINA
Bosnia and Herzegovina
New laws in Republika Srpska further
threatened freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly. Thousands of migrants
remained stranded in the country. LGBTI
people faced physical attacks and
discriminatory speech online. The murder of
a woman by her partner screened live on
social media sparked countrywide protests.
Prosecutions for war crimes progressed
slowly. Heavy reliance on fossil fuels caused
alarming levels of pollution.

BACKGROUND
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) remained
embroiled in political crises. The Republika
Srpska (RS) authorities passed laws that
threatened the constitutional order of BiH,
including one that suspended the rulings of
the BiH Constitutional Court in the RS and
another that suspended publication of the
High Representative’s decisions in the Official
Gazette, thereby preventing them from
entering into force. The EU warned that the
laws had no legal basis and undermined
BiH’s accession process.

101

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION
The BiH Journalists’ Association recorded an
increase in attacks on journalists, with over
70 cases recorded in 2023, of which fewer
than 25% were investigated.
In July, the RS National Assembly passed
amendments to the Criminal Code to classify
defamation as a criminal offence, punishable
by a fine of up to BAM 3,000 (EUR 1,500).
The UN, Council of Europe and EU
condemned the move, saying it breached
BiH’s international human rights
commitments. The Media Freedom Rapid
Response project said the law posed an
“existential threat” to independent
journalism. In September, Journalist Club
Banja Luka filed a petition to formally
challenge the law before the RS
Constitutional Court.
In September, the RS National Assembly
adopted in its first reading the Law on Special
Registry and Publicity of the Work of NGOs,
establishing a registry of foreign-funded
NGOs, classified as “agents of foreign
influence”, and requiring extensive reporting
requirements and heavy penalties for noncompliance. The Council of Europe’s human
rights commissioner warned that the law
would further restrict the rights of NGOs and
human rights defenders, and the EU called
for its withdrawal.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The authorities recorded close to 35,000
arrivals in 2023, the majority from
Afghanistan, Morocco and Syria. More than
2,500 refugees and migrants were stranded
in BiH at the end of the year, most of them in
Una-Sana Canton.
In June, the authorities stopped the
construction of an EU-funded detention unit
within the Lipa reception facility near Bihac,
intended to accommodate people whose
asylum claims had been rejected in an EU
member state. The authorities denied any
knowledge of the plan, and the BiH minister
of human rights and refugees described the
unit as a “a classic prison” unsuited to being

102

within a reception facility that also houses
women and children.
Although the speed of processing asylum
claims improved considerably, the asylum
system remained largely ineffective. An overly
restrictive approach to assessing claims led
to only four people being granted refugee
status by November.

DISCRIMINATION
In August, the European Court of Human
Rights ruled in the case of Kovačević v. BiH
that the country’s constitutional system, in
particular its electoral rules, discriminated
against people who did not identify as one of
the constituent peoples (Bosniak, Croat or
Serb) and denied them adequate
representation in legislative and executive
offices. BiH failed to implement five previous
European Court of Human Rights rulings that
the power-sharing arrangements in the
country were discriminatory.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
A Gallup World Poll of 123 countries ranked
BiH as one of the most hostile places in the
world for LGBTI people.
In March, RS police banned a film
screening organized by LGBTI groups in
Banja Luka, citing threats from violent
groups. The organizers, who sought shelter in
another venue, were then attacked by a
group of men. Activists said that police
officers who were nearby failed to protect
them. The Council of Europe’s human rights
commissioner said the authorities had an
obligation to protect LGBTI people’s right to
freedom of peaceful assembly.
In a separate incident, participants in the 8
March women’s rights protest were physically
and verbally attacked because one
participant was carrying a rainbow flag. The
Council of Europe’s human rights
commissioner condemned the violence and
urged police to investigate.
In the month leading up to the annual Pride
march in Sarajevo in June, LGBTI activists
faced widespread discriminatory speech on
social media platforms, including from public
officials.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In August, in the days following the murder of
a woman by her partner who live-streamed
the killing on social media, thousands of
people across the country held
demonstrations against domestic violence.
They demanded criminalization of femicide,
harsher penalties for domestic violence and
more shelters for victims.
The authorities did not keep an official
record of cases of femicide.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
The pace of prosecutions for war crimes
remained slow. In November, the Council of
Ministers extended the original December
2023 deadline for processing the remaining
complex war crimes cases until 2025.
In May, the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals confirmed
the original guilty verdicts for former Serbian
state security officials Jovica Stanišić and
Franko Simatović, increasing their prison
sentences from 12 to 15 years for war crimes
and crimes against humanity in six
municipalities in BiH.1 More than 7,500
people remained missing as a result of the
armed conflict.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Heavy reliance on the burning of coal and
wood resulted in alarmingly high air pollution,
with some cities among the most polluted in
the world during the winter months.
Despite commitments made under the
2020 Sofia Declaration on the Green Agenda
for the Western Balkans, the authorities
made limited progress on reducing carbon
emissions.
1. “Bosnia and Herzegovina: War crimes convictions a historic moment
for international justice”, 31 May

BOTSWANA
Republic of Botswana

The State of the World’s Human Rights

The right to freedom of expression was
restricted. Severe medicine shortages
undermined the right to health. Potential
advances in the rights of LGBTI people were
threatened. Gender-based violence
remained prevalent. Botswana continued to
use the death penalty.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
During the UN Human Rights Council’s UPR
in May, concerns were raised about an
increase in measures that repressed peaceful
dissent, including the persecution of political
opponents and the use of arbitrary detention.
Between 12 and 16 July, the Directorate of
Intelligence and Security arrested leaders of
the Botswana Patriotic Front opposition party
Lawrence Ookeditse, Lazarus Lekgoanyana
and Dinah Monte, in locations around the
capital, Gaborone. Then, on 20 July, they
arrested journalists Ryder Gabathuse and
Innocent Selatlhwa at the Mmegi newspaper
offices in Gaborone. Electronic devices
belonging to all five of them were seized and
retained. No charges were brought against
them, the journalists were released after 24
hours, and two of the opposition leaders were
released after several hours. Lawrence
Ookeditse was detained for over 48 hours
without charge, in contravention of national
legislation.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
A severe shortage of essential medicines in
health facilities continued in several districts.
The shortage was blamed on various factors,
including inadequate funding for the
procurement of medicines, delays in
overseas deliveries, and corruption and
mismanagement in the procurement system.
In August, nurses went on strike over pay
and refused to dispense medication after
negotiations with the government reached a
deadlock, compounding the crisis.

DISCRIMINATION
LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
On 22 July, hundreds of protesters, backed
by various religious groups, took to the streets
of Gaborone to oppose a bill to legalize

103

consensual same-sex relations that was
designed to align with a 2019 court ruling,
which affirmed the human rights of LGBTI
people.
GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
According to a report from research network
Afrobarometer in January, gender-based
violence remained a major concern in
Botswana, with 50% of citizens saying it was
common in their community. Over four in 10
respondents said that women reporting
incidents of such violence against them were
likely to face criticism, harassment or
shaming. Also in January, sex workers said
they were sexually assaulted, harassed and
had money extorted from them by on-duty
and uniformed police and military personnel.
In December, the Botswana Police Service
said it recorded 87 cases of rape and 42
cases of statutory rape over the Christmas
holiday period.
The Institute for Human Rights and
Development in Africa (a pan-African NGO),
made a complaint in August to the African
Committee of Experts on the Rights and
Welfare of the Child, regarding the
government’s failure to investigate and bring
an alleged male offender, also a well-known
figure, to justice in connection with the
repeated rape of a child between 2017 and
2020.

DEATH PENALTY
Botswana continued to use the death penalty.
In May, Mmoloki Pholo was sentenced to
death for the murder of Kemme Mercy
Sebolao.

BRAZIL
Federative Republic of Brazil
Brazil continued to have one of the highest
levels of inequality in the world. Systemic
racism persisted affecting the Black
population’s social, economic, cultural,
political, and civil rights. Women, especially
Black women, still experienced barriers to
access their rights. Covid-19 cases

104

remained high and excess deaths far
exceeded expectations. Food insecurity
remained extensive and one third of the
population remained below the poverty line.
Low attendance in schools persisted and
violence in schools increased. Police
violence remained deeply concerning,
resulting in unlawful killings and other
serious rights violations; impunity prevailed.
Human rights defenders and activists
remained at significant risk. Extreme
weather events caused death, destruction of
property and displacement. Indigenous
Peoples were denied the full enjoyment of
their rights and progress was slow in the
demarcation of land. Gender-based violence
remained alarmingly prevalent, with
transgender people at significant risk.
Abortion remained illegal, putting pregnant
people at risk.

BACKGROUND
Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva took office as
president in January, after winning elections
in 2022 for the third time. On 8 January,
3,900 protesters contested the election
results in the capital, Brasília. By December,
1,345 people had been charged and 30
people had been convicted of crimes
including “violent abolition of the democratic
rule of law” and “attempted coup d’état”.
The Supreme Electoral Court barred former
president Jair Bolsonaro from running for
political office until 2030. Bolsonaro was
being investigated for various crimes,
including fraud schemes relating to Covid-19
vaccination records.
By December, the National Ombudsperson
of Human Rights’ Office had registered more
than 3.4 million allegations of human rights
violations in Brazil, including racism, physical
and psychological violence and sexual
harassment. This was an increase of 41%
compared with the whole of 2022.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Social and economic rights continued to be
violated, and racial and gender inequalities
remained a key factor. Brazil had one of the

The State of the World’s Human Rights

highest levels of inequality globally; the
greatest gaps existed between Black and
white people, especially women, in terms of
income and rates of employment.
Despite a slight above-inflation increase in
the minimum wage, and the expansion of the
Bolsa Familia, Brazil’s social welfare
programme and one of the world’s largest
cash transfer programmes, the richest 1% of
the population still owned almost half the
country’s wealth, according to the World
Bank.
RIGHT TO HEALTH
The number of excess deaths recorded
between January and mid-July was 48,515
(18% more than expected). This was
attributed to under-reporting of Covid-19
cases and its long-term effects, overcrowding
in hospitals and health centres, and people
experiencing sudden or chronic illness not
seeking care due to fear of contracting
Covid-19.
According to the Ministry of Health,
maternal mortality led to 477 deaths between
January and May, with Black and Indigenous
women disproportionally affected. The rate of
maternal mortality among Black women was
double that among white women.
RIGHT TO FOOD
Food insecurity disproportionally affected
Black families; 22% of homes headed by
Black women faced hunger. More than 70
million people suffered from food insecurity
and 21.1 million (10% of the population)
faced hunger. The government’s Brazil
Without Hunger plan aimed to reduce poverty
by 2.5% and remove the country from the
UN Food and Agriculture Organization’s
Hunger Map by 2030.
RIGHTS TO HOUSING AND WORK
Systematic racism and sexism continued to
restrict the rights to adequate housing and
decent work. Of households headed by Black
women, 63% were below the poverty line.
In 2022, 33% of the population were still
below the poverty line, with 6.4% living in
extreme poverty; 100 million people still
lacked sanitation and easy access to water.
Data from the Ministry of Social Development
showed that 3 million families benefiting from

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Bolsa Familia were lifted above the poverty
line between March and September. The
programme assisted 21.4 million families in
2023.
The housing deficit remained high, with at
least 215,000 people experiencing
homelessness, according to the Federal
University of Minas Gerais. Brazil had 11,403
favelas (slum neighbourhoods in major
cities), where around 16 million people (12%
of Brazil’s population) lived in 6.6 million
households.
A large proportion of the population did not
have access to a minimum wage. According
to the Abrinq Foundation, 50.8% of children
up to 14 years (22.3 million) lived in
households with a per-capita income of up to
half the minimum wage, an increase of 2.7
million compared with 2022. Of these, 10.6
million (24.1%) lived on a per-capita
household income of up to a quarter of the
minimum wage.
The rate of unemployment fell from 9.2% in
2022 to 7.7% in the third quarter of the year
(8.3 million people). There were 39 million
people working in the informal sector.
During the year, the National
Ombudsperson of Human Rights’ Office
received complaints about 3,422 cases of
work analogous to slavery, 3,925 cases of
labour exploitation, and 1,443 institutional
practices that violated human rights.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
A UNICEF study showed that 2 million
children and adolescents (10%) were not
attending school in Brazil in 2023. The main
reasons were child labour (48%) and
learning difficulties (30%). Other factors
included teenage pregnancy (14%) and
racism (6%). Of children not attending
school, 63% were Black. The Congress
extended until 2033 its quota system, an
affirmative action for university admission,
and specifically included quilombolas (see
below, Quilombolas) among the beneficiaries.
Violence in schools increased. By the end of
October, there were 13 episodes of violent
attacks with weapons in schools (30% of all
incidents in the past 20 years), including

105

shootings, which left nine people dead. All
the perpetrators were male; most victims
were female.

UNLAWFUL USE OF FORCE
Police violence, unlawful killings, and
arbitrary detentions persisted. Due to
systemic racism, Black people were
disproportionately affected. Between July and
September, at least 394 people were killed in
police operations in the states of Bahia, Rio
de Janeiro, and São Paulo. Despite the extent
of the crisis, the executive secretary of the
Ministry of Justice, and Public Security,
referring to Bahia, reportedly commented:
“You don’t fight organized crime with a rifle
with roses.”
A 2019 Federal Supreme Court ruling that
introduced measures to reduce police
violence continued to be disregarded. Heavily
armed police operations oriented towards the
“war on drugs” in favelas and marginalized
neighbourhoods resulted in intense
shootouts, unlawful killings and extrajudicial
executions, unlawful entry into and
destruction of property, torture and other illtreatment, restrictions on freedom of
movement, enforced disappearances, and
the suspension of essential services such as
schools and health clinics. In October, more
than 120,000 residents of the favela
Complexo da Maré in Rio de Janeiro city
were impacted by six days of police
operations. During this period, more than
17,000 students did not have access to
school and more than 3,000 medical service
appointments were suspended.
In Baixada Santista region in São Paulo
state, a police operation launched on 28 July
in response to the death of a police officer
resulted in the arrest of 958 people and 30
deaths and unlawful raids. Amnesty
International, in partnership with the National
Council for Human Rights, documented 11
cases of serious human rights violations
perpetrated by state agents, including
extrajudicial executions, unlawful entry of
homes, and torture and other ill-treatment. In
the state of Rio de Janeiro, a police operation
in the neighbourhood of Vila Cruzeiro on 2

106

August resulted in 10 deaths and four
injuries.
Police intervention continued to cause the
deaths of children and adolescents. On 7
August, Thiago Menezes, 13 years old, was
unlawfully killed by police while riding a
motorcycle. On 4 September, the Rio de
Janeiro state court ordered the preventive
detention of four police officers involved in
the killing. On 12 August, five-year-old Eloah
Passos was hit by a stray bullet while playing
inside her home. On 16 August, three-yearold Heloísa Santos died after being shot by a
police officer while in a car with her family.

IMPUNITY
The unlawful use of force by police continued
not to be investigated promptly or effectively.
The enforced disappearance in 2014 of 16year-old Davi Fiuza during a police raid in the
city of Salvador, in Bahia state, remained
unsolved. Three police officers indicted for
the murder of activist Pedro Henrique Cruz in
2018 in Tucano, Bahia, had still not been
brought to trial and his mother, Ana Maria,
continued to suffer threats and intimidation.
On 26 September, the Rio de Janeiro State
Public Prosecutor’s Office reopened the
investigation into the murder of 10-year-old
Eduardo de Jesus, who was shot dead by
military police in Complexo do Alemão, Rio
de Janeiro city, in 2015 while playing outside
his home. Three police officers were indicted
for the murder of 14-year-old João Pedro in
2020 while playing inside his house. At the
end of 2023, they had still not been brought
to trial and continued to participate in police
operations.
In the state of Ceará, between June and
September, 20 out of 33 police officers
indicted for participating in the 2015
Massacre of Curió stood trial. Six of them
were convicted of murder and torture, and 14
were acquitted. Another 13 had yet to be put
on trial.
On 24 July, the Federal Police arrested
former firefighter Maxwell Simões Corrêa as a
third suspect in the long-running
investigation into the murders of councillor
and human rights defender Marielle Franco

The State of the World’s Human Rights

and her driver Anderson Gomes in 2018. He
and the two other suspects, former military
police officers Ronnie Lessa and Élcio de
Queiroz, remained under arrest and were
facing charges.

the killing of her son, known as “Binho do
Quilombo”. Mãe Bernadete had made
several complaints about being threatened
and was included in the protection
programme.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT

Brazil failed to protect human rights
defenders. According to Justiça Global, on
average three defenders have been
murdered in Brazil every month over the past
four years.
The Programme for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, established by
decree in 2007, was still not supported by
legislation and lacked differentiated
approaches to gender, race, ethnicity, sexual
diversity, and territory. Sixteen states lacked
their own programmes, compromising the
efficacy of the protection measures.
According to the Ministry of Human Rights,
out of the 269 cases under analysis in
August, 30% involved the persecution of
Indigenous defenders and 44% Black
defenders.
Two precautionary measures for the
protection of human rights defenders were
granted by the Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights: one regarding the Pataxó
Indigenous People in Bahia state and the
other for the Boa Hora III Quilombola territory
in Maranhão state.
More than a year after the murders of
environmental activists Bruno Pereira and
Dom Phillips, the Federal Justice decided to
try the defendants for murder and concealing
a corpse. The Federal Police alleged that
Rubens Villar Coelho, known as “Colômbia”,
had ordered the murders, but the
investigation had not been concluded by the
end of the year.
The murder of Raimundo Nonato, an
activist from the Landless Rural Workers’
Movement killed by three hooded men in
2022, remained unsolved.
In August, Yalorixá Maria Bernadete
Pacífico (“Mãe Bernadete”), the 72-year-old
leader of the Pitanga dos Palmares Quilombo
in Simões Filho city, Bahia, was killed. Since
2017, she had been fighting for justice for

Brazil had still not ratified the Escazú
Agreement. Extreme weather events caused
deaths, destruction of property and
displacement, disproportionately affecting
Black people, who were more likely to live in
high-risk areas with no prevention or
protection measures.
The National Civil Defence mapped
approximately 14,000 areas with very high
risk of geological disaster, potentially affecting
the homes of 4 million people. Government
responses did not properly address these
risks and the rights to housing, water,
security and life of thousands of people were
severely compromised. On 16 February, on
the coast of São Paulo state, heavy rainfall
caused the deaths of 49 people, left 23
injured, rendered 2,251 homeless and
displaced 1,815. Water, electricity and
telephone services were affected. In June,
heavy rains affected 31,000 families in
Maranhão state, leaving six people dead,
1,920 homeless and 3,923 displaced. In the
state of Acre, around 32,000 people were
affected; in Pará state, at least 1,800 people
were forced to leave their homes; and in the
city of Manaus, 172 families lost their homes.
In September, the third cyclone of 2023 left
21 people dead and thousands homeless in
Rio Grande do Sul state. Dozens of
municipalities were flooded, power was cut
off and homes were swept away. According to
Climate Action Tracker, the government’s
policies regarding adaptation and mitigation
were “highly insufficient”, and all responses
lacked planning and federal coordination.
Areas of the state of Amazonas recorded
their lowest rainfall in the last 40 years
causing extreme drought.
According to official data, deforestation in
the Amazon, one of the world’s most
important carbon sinks, decreased to the
lowest rate in the last five years, but was still

The State of the World’s Human Rights

107

equivalent to 1,300 football fields per day.
During COP28, President Lula announced
that Brazil would join the informal alliance
OPEC+ (Organization of the Petroleum
Exporting Countries and allied countries) and
reinforced in his speech that Brazil would
take the lead on climate policies to guarantee
a just transition to a green economy. The
COP also confirmed that Brazil would host
the COP30 meeting in Belem do Para in the
Amazon region in 2025.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Sônia Guajajara, an Indigenous woman,
became the first minister of Indigenous
Peoples.
Indigenous Peoples were denied full
enjoyment of their rights to their lands and
territories, health, food security, selfdetermination and traditional ways of living.
On 20 January, the Ministry of Health
declared a national public health emergency
due to the lack of assistance available for the
Yanomami population, which was suffering
from malnutrition, contamination and sexual
violence, caused largely by the presence of
illegal mining activities. Despite this, 263,000
hectares of illegal mining spots remained,
almost 90% of which were located in the
Amazon region.
The government approved the demarcation
of eight Indigenous lands, but 134
procedures were still in the study phase,
according to the National Indigenous
Foundation. Congress passed a bill limiting
the time frame for the demarcation of
Indigenous lands at the beginning of October;
the president partially vetoed the issue and
eventually Congress rejected the president´s
veto.
As a result of conflict and violence relating
to land demarcation, in January two young
Pataxó men, Nawir Brito de Jesus and
Samuel Cristiano do Amor Divino, were
murdered in Bahia state. In June, a 16-yearold Pataxó teenager was murdered in the
same state. In April, a Yanomami Indigenous
man was killed after an attack by miners in
Roraima state. In September, a Guarani
Kaiowá couple, Sebastiana Gauto and Rufino

108

Velasque, were found dead in their house in
Mato Grosso do Sul state, having been burnt
to death.
According to the Ministry of Human Rights,
11 Guarani Kaiowá people were included in
the Programme for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders.
QUILOMBOLAS
According to the 2022 census, 1,327,802
people identified themselves as Quilombolas
(traditional people who are descendants of
Africans who escaped slavery), representing
0.65% of the Brazilian population. Little
progress was made on land titles for
Quilombola communities. The Quilombola
Lands Observatory noted 1,787 titling
processes underway as of October. Five new
titles were granted to Quilombola
communities in 2023, benefiting 960
families.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
The extent of gender-based violence
remained alarming. From January to June,
there were 599 femicides and 263 attempted
femicides. Up to October, 86,593 reports of
violence against women had been registered.
The state had still not implemented public
policies against gender-based violence that
addressed the intersections between gender
and race.
Transgender people continued to face
extreme violence and human rights
violations. For the 14th consecutive year,
more transgender people were killed in Brazil
than anywhere else in the world. By October,
the National Ombudsperson of Human
Rights’ Office had registered 3,873 human
rights violations affecting transgender people,
such as physical violence, discrimination and
racism, compared with 3,309 cases in 2022.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Abortion remained a criminal offence. Up to
July, according to the Ministry of Health, at
least 19 people had died due to unsafe
abortions. In September, a lawsuit seeking
the decriminalization of abortion in the first
12 weeks of pregnancy was put before the

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Federal Supreme Court, but voting was
suspended.

BULGARIA
Republic of Bulgaria
Independent journalists and media faced
intense pressure and harassment, including
by public officials. Parliament adopted
measures to strengthen protection of
victims of domestic violence. The definition
of hate crimes was expanded to include
sexual orientation. Discrimination against
minorities remained widespread. Refugees
and migrants faced violent pushbacks.
Conditions in psychiatric care and social
care institutions were concerning.

BACKGROUND
In April, the fifth consecutive general election
in less than two years failed to produce a
clear majority, leaving the country in a
protracted political crisis. In July, Bulgaria
experienced a prolonged heatwave, with
temperatures reaching 40oC.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Independent journalists and media outlets
reporting on organized crime and corruption
continued to face threats, harassment and
smear campaigns. Public officials and
businesses filed numerous strategic lawsuits
against public participation (SLAPPs) against
journalists and reporters.
In March, an insurance company filed a
defamation lawsuit against independent news
website Mediapool claiming a record BGN 1
million (EUR 500,000) in damages, putting
the website at risk of bankruptcy.
In April, the Sofia City Prosecutor’s Office
published screenshots of a journalist’s private
communication with a source. The Media
Freedom Rapid Response project called this
an “alarming violation of source
confidentiality”. In the same month,
journalists Dimitar Stoyanov, Atanas
Tchobanov and Nikolay Marchenko were
targeted by six defamation lawsuits over their

The State of the World’s Human Rights

reporting on links between a suspected drug
lord and Bulgarian police officials. Media
associations publicly condemned “retaliatory
and vexatious legal actions” against
journalists.
In July, parliament adopted changes to the
Criminal Code that provided greater, albeit
insufficient, protection for journalists against
SLAPPs, including a significant reduction in
fines for defamation against public officials.
The Centre for Media Pluralism and Media
Freedom identified Bulgaria as a “high risk”
country in terms of media freedom and
pluralism.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
In June, a man from Stara Zagora was
arrested after a knife attack on his 18-yearold ex-girlfriend, who sustained injuries
requiring more than 400 stitches. A local
court’s description of the wounds as “minor
bodily harm” and its decision to initially
release the assailant on 5 July prompted
countrywide protests and demands to end
impunity for domestic violence. Amid public
pressure, the authorities re-arrested the man
on 30 July and pressed fresh charges against
him in November.
In August, parliament adopted amendments
to the Criminal Code and the Law on
Protection from Domestic Violence to expand
the right to protection for people who
experienced violence in an extramarital
“intimate relationship”. Civil society groups
criticized the legal definition requiring an
intimate relationship to have lasted at least
60 days to be subject to the law, while
conservative groups objected to the
amendments, saying that they promoted
“gender ideology”. Also in August, the
government announced it was developing
further measures to address the “hidden
epidemic” of domestic violence.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In February, the Supreme Court of Cassation
ended the possibility of legal gender
recognition for transgender people.
In July, parliament amended the Criminal
Code to include attacks against people due to

109

their sexual orientation as hate crimes, and
imposed harsher penalties for perpetrators.
Also in July, the Sofia Court of Appeals
convicted the former presidential candidate
Boyan Rassate of hooliganism following a
2021 attack on an activist in the LGBTI
community centre Rainbow Hub and
sentenced him to six months’ probation.
In September, the European Court of
Human Rights found that Bulgaria’s failure to
legally recognize same-sex couples violated
people’s right to private and family life.

DISCRIMINATION
In July, the Commission for Protection against
Discrimination fined the conservative
Bulgarian National Movement Party BGN
1,000 (EUR 500) and prohibited them from
publishing content on their website that
incites hatred against ethnic minorities. The
Commission described some publications on
the website as hate speech, and said that
making generalizations about ethnic groups
constituted discrimination, which is
prohibited by law.
Also in July, the Commission for Protection
against Discrimination said it was
investigating cases of Roma being denied
entry to public swimming pools across the
country.
In the same month, the Prosecutor’s Office
investigated the pro-Russian Revival party
after its official social media channel depicted
a photomontage of Solomon Passy – a former
foreign minister of Jewish origin – wearing a
concentration camp prisoner uniform and
being taken away by Nazi soldiers,
presumably to be gassed. The image was
captioned: “If you don’t like Russian gas,
have some of ours.”

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Summary returns of refugees and migrants,
increasingly accompanied by violence,
remained widespread at the borders,
especially with Türkiye. In March, the
European Commission launched a EUR 45
million pilot programme in Bulgaria with the
reported aim of fast-tracking the asylum

110

process and bolstering border security and
surveillance systems.

RIGHTS OF PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
In March, the UN Human Rights Committee
(HRC) said Bulgaria had violated multiple
rights of Valya Lazarova, who was confined in
a social care home for eight years due to an
intellectual disability, and died in 2007. The
HRC said Bulgaria had failed to ensure her
protection and that she had “lost her life as a
direct consequence of the deplorable
conditions” in the care home.
In April, the European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture visited Bulgaria to
review progress on the implementation of its
long-standing recommendations concerning
the “extremely concerning” situation of
people held in psychiatric institutions and
social care homes. In November, the
parliament established a temporary
committee, tasked with proposing legislative
changes to ensure that the rights of patients
with mental illness are guaranteed in law.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Bulgaria’s reliance on fossil fuels remained
high. In January, parliament voted to
backtrack on plans for an early phase-out of
coal-fired plants. In July, parliament tasked
the minister of energy to explore further
offshore fossil gas explorations in the Black
Sea, contrary to its obligations under the
Paris Agreement to reduce emissions. The
European Commission said Bulgaria would
need to greatly strengthen its renewable
targets to reflect the EU’s ambitious climate
and energy targets.

BURKINA FASO
Burkina Faso
Freedom of expression was curtailed with
foreign journalists expelled and media
suspended by authorities in the context of
the post-coup transitional regime and the
armed conflict. Armed groups and
government forces committed unlawful

The State of the World’s Human Rights

attacks. Several public figures were victims
of enforced disappearances and women and
girls were victims of abduction. Armed
groups severely restricted the economic and
social rights of civilians in towns and
villages under siege.

BACKGROUND
The armed conflict continued between army
forces together with the Volunteers for the
Defence of the Homeland (VDPs) – an
auxiliary force – and Ansaroul Islam and
other armed groups. One Burkinabe in 10
was displaced by the conflict. The
government’s control over its territory was
limited to 65%, according to the prime
minister. The government extended the state
of emergency to eight additional provinces
and promulgated a decree allowing the
authorities to conscript citizens for national
defence purposes. Burkina Faso also
contracted an alliance with Mali and Niger,
the Alliance of Sahelian States, for defence
purposes.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Authorities who came to power by a coup in
September 2022 clamped down on anyone
they considered to be critical of their
governance. Conscription was used by the
authorities to silence and harass independent
voices. In March, Boukaré Ouedraogo,
president of Appel de Kaya, a civil society
organization, was forcibly enrolled for a
month as a VDP by the military,
notwithstanding his visual impairment, after
he criticized the government for the lack of
drinkable water in the city of Kaya and for
their inadequate response to the security
situation. In early November, Daouda Diallo,
secretary general of the Coalition Against
Impunity and Stigmatization of Communities,
was conscripted by the government, along
with 11 other civil society actors and media
figures who publicly expressed their criticism
of government policies. On 1 December,
Daouda Diallo was abducted by security
forces and a few days later a picture showing
him armed and in military clothing circulated
on social media. On 27 December, Ablassé

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Ouedraogo, a politician and former Minister
of Foreign Affairs, was arrested at his home
by individuals in civilian clothes and taken to
an unknown destination.
JOURNALISTS AND MEDIA
On 31 March, two correspondents for the
French newspapers Libération and Le Monde
were summoned to the State Security agency,
the authority in charge of domestic
intelligence, and questioned for their
reporting on the conflict. Both were
subsequently expelled from Burkina Faso.1
In March, the French media agency France
24 was suspended after broadcasting the
written responses of the leader of Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb to questions submitted
by a journalist.
In May, two journalists from the Omega
media group, Lookman Sawadogo and Alain
Traoré, were detained and charged with
“complicity in failing to report an offence” in
the case concerning audio messages calling
on citizens to burn down the palace of the
Mogho Naaba, one of Burkina Faso’s major
traditional chieftains. They were acquitted in
July.
In August, the Omega media group was
suspended for one month after broadcasting
an interview with a Nigerien political figure (a
former member of the deposed president
Bazoum’s cabinet and spokesperson for a
political movement opposed to the new
military authorities).

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
According to reports from media and the
NGO Burkinabe Movement for Human and
People’s Rights / Mouvement Burkinabe des
Droits de l’Homme et des Peuples (MBDHP),
at least 60 civilians were killed in February
during an attack against the town of Partiaga
(Tapoa province, Eastern region), allegedly by
members of Ansaroul Islam.
On 11 May, according to a communiqué of
the governor of the Boucle de Mouhoun
region, at least 33 civilians were killed by an
armed group in the village of Youlou while
they were tending their fields.

111

On 6 August, suspected Ansaroul Islam
members unlawfully killed at least 22 people
during a raid in Nohao (a town in the CentreEst region), in which tradespeople were
targeted. A dozen cars and trucks carrying
goods were also burnt during the attack.
ABUSES BY GOVERNMENT FORCES
On 13 February, military soldiers and VDPs
abducted seven civilians, including at least
one minor, from La Ferme in Ouahigouya,
where there is a substantial population of
displaced people. These individuals were
taken to the Zondoma military camp and
were beaten and stoned to death, a crime
that was video recorded and spread via social
media.
During 3-4 April, several soldiers based in
Dori (Sahel province) beat up and shot dead
seven civilians in Petit-Paris, also wounding
several others, according to the MBDHP. The
raid was reportedly in retaliation for the
murder of a soldier in the neighbourhood a
few days earlier.
On 20 April, soldiers accompanied by VDPs
killed at least 147 civilians in the village of
Karma (Yatenga province, Northern region)
during a patrol operation. Members of the
3rd Rapid Intervention Battalion, a special
unit of the army, participated in the
operation.2

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Several public figures were victims of
enforced disappearances.
On 25 March, El Hadj Hamidou Bandé,
national president of the Ruugas, an
organization representing pastoralists’
interests, was abducted by four men in Fada
Ngourma (Eastern region). A few days later,
one of his associates, Moussa Thiombiano
known as “Django”, a Koglweogo chieftain,
was abducted near his residence.
On 28 April, Mohamed Diallo, the 74-yearold imam of the Lafiabougou mosque in
Bobo-Dioulasso (Hauts-Bassins region) was
arrested at his home by men presenting
themselves as members of the security and
defence forces.
On 21 September, businessman Anselme
Kambou was taken from his home by

112

suspected members of the intelligence
services and taken to an unknown
destination. In November, a court in the
capital, Ouagadougou, ordered the
intelligence services to release him but he
remained in detention.
His fate and whereabouts, and those of the
other three men above, remained unknown
at year’s end.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
On 12 January, 66 women, girls, and newborns were abducted by alleged members of
Ansaroul Islam, near the village of Liki (Soum
province, Sahel region).3 The women had
been gathering food due to the siege against
the town of Arbinda by Ansaroul Islam. They
were freed in the town of Tougouri, on 16
January, during a routine road control of the
truck they were in.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Armed groups, such as Ansaroul Islam,
abused the economic, social and cultural
rights of thousands of Burkinabe by laying
siege to at least 46 towns and villages.
Inflation became endemic in several of the
besieged towns such as Djibo, Tanwalbougou
and Gayeri. Armed groups sabotaged water
infrastructure in Djibo, attacked food supply
convoys trying to reach these towns and
forbade residents from farming their lands or
grazing their livestock around many of these.
RIGHT TO EDUCATION
As of October, at least 6,549 schools were
forced to close due to the conflict, according
to the Ministry of Education. The same
source stated that 539 schools were
reopened in 2023. According to UNICEF,
more than 31,000 teachers and over 1
million schoolchildren were affected by these
school closures.
1. “Burkina Faso: In the face of repeated attacks, the right to
information must be protected”, 7 April (French only)
2. Burkina Faso: Responsibility of the army indicated in Karma
massacre”, 3 May
3. Burkina Faso: “Death Was Slowly Creeping on Us”: Living Under Siege
in Burkina Faso, 2 November

The State of the World’s Human Rights

BURUNDI
Republic of Burundi
Journalists, human rights defenders and
activists were arrested and prosecuted in
violation of the rights to a fair trial, and to
freedom of expression, association and
peaceful assembly. Government officials
interfered in the internal affairs of the main
opposition party. Arbitrary arrests and
detentions, and cases of enforced
disappearance and violations of the right to
life continued to be reported. Accusations
of bias within the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission persisted. High-level officials
promoted discrimination and incited
violence on the grounds of sexual
orientation and gender identity, as well as
against single mothers. Although violence
against women remained a concern,
reporting and prosecution of such crimes
continued to be low. Measures taken by the
government exacerbated the impact of the
cost-of-living crisis, and the right to health
was undermined. Almost 74,000 people
remained internally displaced, most of them
by natural disasters. Returning Burundian
refugees and asylum seekers faced
intimidation, extortion and arbitrary
detention.

BACKGROUND
Former prime minister Alain-Guillaume
Bunyoni was convicted on 8 December on
charges including undermining the internal
security of the state, undermining the proper
functioning of the national economy, illegal
taking of interest, illegal possession of
weapons and insulting the president. He was
sentenced to life imprisonment.1
In accordance with the 2018 constitution,
the senate evaluated whether to continue
with ethnic quotas in the executive, legislative
and judicial branches of government.
The government rejected many pertinent
recommendations made during its UPR
in May.2

The State of the World’s Human Rights

In July, the government delegation walked
out of its review session at the UN Human
Rights Committee, objecting to the presence
of a human rights defender convicted in his
absence on false accusations of participating
in the 2015 coup attempt.
The UN Special Rapporteur on Burundi
said the National Independent Human Rights
Commission’s reports “gloss[ed] over
politically sensitive issues”.
The armed group RED-Tabara claimed
responsibility for an attack in Vugizo sector
next to the border with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on 22 December and
said that it killed nine soldiers and one
policeman. The Burundian government said
20 people were killed, including 19 civilians.
President Ndayishimiye accused
neighbouring Rwanda of supporting the
armed group, which Rwanda denied.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
Journalist Floriane Irangabiye was convicted
of “undermining the integrity of the national
territory” on 2 January and sentenced to 10
years in prison. Her conviction, based on
comments made on an online radio show,
was upheld on appeal in May. A longstanding medical condition was exacerbated
by her detention conditions in Muyinga
prison and she requested a transfer to
Bujumbura, where she was initially arrested,
to be closer to her family and to have access
to more appropriate medical care.3 In
October, she was moved to Bubanza prison,
40km from Bujumbura.
In June, the minister of interior suspended
all activities of the main opposition party, the
National Congress for Liberty (CNL), apart
from meetings aimed at resolving internal
party tensions. The CNL leadership and other
observers accused the minister of interfering
in the internal affairs of the party.
There were regular arrests of CNL members
accused of holding unauthorized meetings.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
On 14 February, human rights defenders
Sonia Ndikumasabo, Marie Emerusabe,
Audace Havyarimana and Sylvana Inamahoro

113

were arrested at the airport on their way to
Uganda for a meeting. A fifth activist, Prosper
Runyange, was arrested in Ngozi and
transferred to Bujumbura. They were
charged with rebellion, undermining internal
state security and undermining the
functioning of public finances, all on account
of their human rights work.4 In late April,
Sonia Ndikumasabo and Marie Emerusabe
were acquitted of all charges, and the rest
were found guilty of rebellion and given oneyear suspended sentences. All five were
released.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Christophe Sahabo, managing director of Kira
Hospital in Bujumbura, remained in
detention, having been arrested in April 2022
and later charged with several economic
crimes. There were repeated delays in the
judicial proceedings.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Reports of enforced disappearances
continued throughout the year, with the main
alleged perpetrators continuing to be the
National Intelligence Service (SNR) and
members of the ruling party’s youth wing, the
Imbonerakure. Most victims were political
opponents – members of the CNL and the
Movement for Solidarity and Democracy –
although members of the ruling National
Council for the Defence of Democracy-Forces
for the Defence of Democracy in conflict with
the party hierarchy were also reported
missing.
The government rejected UPR
recommendations to ratify the International
Convention against enforced disappearance.

RIGHT TO LIFE
Burundian human rights organizations
continued to document the regular discovery
of lifeless bodies, often with marks of
violence, in rivers and bushes around the
country. The UN Special Rapporteur on
Burundi and the UN Human Rights
Committee expressed concern that bodies
were often buried in haste, without their

114

identities being established or investigations
into the circumstances of their deaths.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In March, the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission began public hearings. Its
president told the media that the role of these
hearings was to “reinforce and confirm the
truth already found in the archives through
mass graves and testimonies, but also in
doctrine and published works” and to allow
more people to express themselves.
Accusations of bias against the Commission,
due to its focus on the massacres of 1972,
continued.
The African Commission on Human and
Peoples’ Rights shared its 2022 decision in
favour of victims of violence by the police and
the SNR during the 2015 protests, and
requested the government to investigate and
prosecute those responsible; apologize
publicly to all victims; and provide adequate
compensation, medical assistance and
psychological support.

DISCRIMINATION
On 22 February, 24 people were arrested in
the political capital, Gitega, at a workshop on
economic inclusion. They, and two others
later added to the case, were prosecuted on
charges of “homosexuality” and “incitement
to debauchery”. Seven were found guilty in
August. Nine of the people acquitted were
not immediately released, and one whose
health had deteriorated in detention, died
before the prosecutor agreed to sign his
release papers.
On 1 March, President Ndayishimiye made
discriminatory and homophobic remarks at
the national prayer breakfast, describing
“homosexuality” as a “curse”. On 29
December, he said that LGBTI people found
in Burundi “should be stoned”. The UN
Human Rights Committee expressed concern
about allegations of incitement of hatred and
violence against people on the grounds of
their sexual orientation and gender identity,
including by state authorities and political
leaders. The Committee called on the

The State of the World’s Human Rights

government to repeal discriminatory legal
provisions and investigate and prosecute
those responsible for discrimination and
violence.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In July, the UN Human Rights Committee, in
its review of Burundi’s report, expressed
concern about persistent violence against
women, coupled with the low rate of reporting
and prosecutions. This was due largely to the
risk of stigmatization and reprisals faced by
victims, impunity for perpetrators, and the
insufficient number of reception centres and
protection measures for victims.
Also in July, the minister of interior made
threatening and derogatory remarks about
single mothers, following his earlier drive to
prevent the registration of births of children to
“unknown fathers”. He called on local
administrators in Busiga commune in Ngozi
province to beat them until they revealed the
name of their children’s father.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Increasing prices of food, fuel, and other
essential goods and services had a
detrimental impact on the right to an
adequate standard of living. Almost 10% of
the national 2022/23 budget was allocated to
social protection. However, more than half
the population lived below the poverty line,
and existing social protection programmes
were already insufficient. Some of the
measures taken by the government worsened
the situation for those with the fewest
resources. In June, the central bank gave 10
days’ notice of its decision to withdraw and
replace all BIF 5,000 and 10,000 (around
USD 1.74 and 3.48, respectively)
denomination notes dating from 2018.
Individuals, among the 20% of the population
holding bank accounts, could deposit a
maximum of BIF 10 million (around USD
3,500). Many people reportedly lost savings
held in cash.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The proportion of the national budget
allocated to the health sector decreased from
13.4% in 2021/22 to 9.6% in 2022/23. While
this may be explained by a sharp increase in
the overall budget due to investments in
agriculture and infrastructure, it fell short of
the 15% target allocation set out in the 2001
Abuja Declaration on HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis
and Other Related Infectious Diseases.5
In a discussion on the proposed code of
ethics for healthcare providers in August, the
Council of Ministers recommended
identifying a hospital that could be invested
in as a location suitable for the treatment of
“dignitaries” so that they would not need to
leave the country for medical treatment. With
the Ministry of Public Health reporting that
over 50% of under-fives suffer from chronic
malnutrition, this raised concerns about
budgetary priorities.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Almost 74,000 people remained internally
displaced, 89% as a result of natural
disasters. Numbers affected by natural
disasters leapt from 106,698 in 2022 to
158,939 from January to August 2023,
primarily due to torrential rains and flooding.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Over 25,000 Burundian refugees and asylum
seekers returned to the country, bringing the
total number repatriated since 2017 to
233,271, although a significant number
(273,712 people) remained in neighbouring
countries. Returnees were subjected to
intimidation, extortion and arbitrary detention.
The UN Human Rights Committee called on
the government to take all necessary
measures to guarantee returnees’ integration
with security and dignity, and to conduct
investigations into violations against them.
1. “Burundi: Arrest of former prime minister an opportunity for
accountability”, 26 April
2. “Burundi: Continued impunity and shrinking civic space”, 22
September
3. “Burundi: One year on, fresh calls for journalist’s release”, 30 August

The State of the World’s Human Rights

115

4. “Burundi: Free five rights defenders, drop charges; end civil society
crackdown”, 14 March
5. “Public debt, tax reform and the right to health in Burundi”, 27 June

CAMBODIA
Kingdom of Cambodia
Human trafficking remained widespread
and rescued survivors were held in poor
conditions in immigration detention
centres. Mass forced evictions of thousands
of families from the Angkor UNESCO World
Heritage Site took place. Freedoms of
expression and association were further
restricted as the licence of one of the last
independent news outlets was revoked and
the only remaining opposition party was
barred from contesting national elections. A
major political opposition figure received a
lengthy prison sentence after an unfair trial.
Unfair trials of labour activists also resulted
in convictions. Rampant illegal logging and
mining operations continued in forests in
violation of the human rights of Indigenous
Peoples.

BACKGROUND
The government crackdown on civil society
organizations and political opposition that
began in 2017 continued. National elections
on 23 July were won by the ruling Cambodia
People’s Party after the disqualification of the
only viable opposition party, the Candlelight
Party. In August, the National Assembly
endorsed Hun Manet as prime minister who
replaced his father, Hun Sen.

HUMAN TRAFFICKING
Despite a government crackdown, the human
trafficking crisis continued. According to
credible reports, migrant workers recruited by
deceptive means and trafficked for forced
labour continued to be held in fortified
compounds where they were forced to work
in cyber scams and online gambling
operations run by criminal gangs. It was also
reported that compounds that had previously
been closed in the city of Sihanoukville had

116

reopened, calling into question the
effectiveness of the taskforce set up by the
Ministry of Justice in 2022 to coordinate
investigations and prosecutions of those
responsible for human trafficking of migrant
workers to Cambodia.
Trafficking victims had their passports
confiscated and were forced to work under
threat of violence in illegal operations which
emerged during the Covid-19 pandemic.
During the year the authorities released more
than 100 trafficked people from illegal
compounds and transferred them to
immigration detention centres. However,
rescued survivors, some of whom had been
subjected to rape and other physical
violence, often spent months detained in
overcrowded state-run detention centres,
where they were required to pay for food and
water and did not have access to legal
counsel.1

FORCED EVICTIONS
The authorities continued a process started
in 2022 of mass forced evictions of a
reported 10,000 families from the UNESCO
World Heritage Site of Angkor, home to the
Angkor Wat temple. Although many families
had lived in the complex for several
generations, the government claimed they
were there illegally and were being relocated
as part of a “voluntary relocation
programme”. However, there was a lack of
genuine consultation and many of those
evicted or who faced eviction were subjected
to threats and intimidation. Evicted families,
who left behind livelihoods as well as homes,
did not receive adequate compensation,
forcing many into debt. The government
resettlement sites of Peak Sneng and Run Ta
Ek lacked adequate housing, drinking water
and sanitation.2
Hun Sen, the prime minister at the time,
said the relocation programme was necessary
to prevent Angkor from losing its World
Heritage status. UNESCO had neither
publicly condemned the government’s
actions nor set up an investigation into the
allegations by year’s end, despite being
informed by Amnesty International in March

The State of the World’s Human Rights

and again in September that forced evictions
were being justified in its name.3

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In February, authorities revoked the licence
of one of Cambodia’s few remaining
independent media outlets, Voice of
Democracy (VOD). The closure was
ostensibly for offending the then prime
minister, Hun Sen, following a report about
the authorization of financial aid to Türkiye by
his son Hun Manet who was deputy
commander-in-chief of the Cambodian army
at the time. However, the closure followed the
publication of a series of investigative reports
by VOD about the human trafficking crisis
and government officials’ links to compounds
where cyber-scamming was happening.4

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Misuse of the criminal justice system to target
and harass members and supporters of
opposition political parties continued. In
March, Phnom Penh Municipal Court found
the leader of the Cambodia National Rescue
Party, Kem Sokha, guilty of a trumped-up
charge of treason and sentenced him to 27
years in prison.5
In the weeks before the national election,
and following public calls by Hun Sen for
violence against political opponents, there
were multiple physical attacks, including with
metal batons, by unidentified assailants on
members of the Candlelight Party. In May, the
National Election Committee disqualified the
party from contesting the elections on
politically motivated grounds.6
A month ahead of the elections, on 23
June, the National Assembly unanimously
voted to adopt amendments to the election
law which were also widely viewed as
preventing political opposition and
intimidating the public. Under the
amendments the National Election
Committee can impose a fine of up to KHR
20 million (approximately USD 4,850) on
anyone who encourages people not to
register or vote.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
There was ongoing judicial harassment of
members of the Labor Rights Supported
Union of Khmer Employees of NagaWorld
(LRSU) and other labour activists, linked to
their support for calls for higher wages and
the reinstatement of dismissed workers
following mass layoffs by the Hong Kongregistered NagaWorld Casino in the capital,
Phnom Penh, in late 2021. On 25 May, a
Phnom Penh court found nine current and
former LRSU members guilty of incitement to
commit a felony or disturb public security
under Articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s
Criminal Code. LRSU president Chhim Sithar
was sentenced to two years’ imprisonment.
The remaining eight received suspended
prison sentences of between one year and 18
months.7

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In July, the National Assembly adopted a new
code on environment and natural resources
which, unlike previous land and
environmental laws, replaced the term
“Indigenous communities” with “local
communities”, leading to concerns that the
new code undermines respect for and
protection of Indigenous Peoples’ rights.
Illegal logging continued and new mining
operations took place in Prey Lang forest,
home to Indigenous Kuy communities.
Photographic evidence showed illegal loggers
carrying home-made firearms, and Prey Lang
Community Network members told Amnesty
International about incidents, including at
least one in early 2023, in which loggers shot
at them as a form of intimidation. Concerns
remained that proposed changes to the Law
on Forestry, first floated in 2022, to allow
hunting in protected forests would threaten
wildlife and exacerbate tensions between
Indigenous Peoples, environmental activists
and loggers.
1. Cambodia: New Violations, New Government, Same Old Harms, 20
October
2. “Cambodia: Mass evictions at UNESCO World Heritage Site Angkor
violate international law”, 14 November

117

3. “Cambodia: World Heritage Committee must not ignore ‘mass forced
evictions’ around Angkor Wat”, 10 September
4. “Cambodia: Shuttering ‘Voice of Democracy’ outlet is attempt to slam
door on independent media”, 13 February
5. “Cambodia: Opposition leader Kem Sokha sentenced to 27 years on
fabricated treason charge”, 3 March
6. “Cambodia: Election takes place under cloud of human rights crisis”,
21 July
7. “Cambodia: Casino union leader Chhim Sithar and strikers
convicted”, 25 May

CAMEROON
Republic of Cameroon
The right to freedom of expression was
seriously under threat, and two journalists
were murdered. Political opponents, and
anglophone people in the North-West and
South-West regions, continued to be
arbitrarily arrested. In the North-West and
South-West anglophone regions, the
Cameroonian army and armed separatist
groups carried out unlawful killings and
murders. In the Far North region, armed
groups descended from Boko-Haram
continued to carry out killings and
abductions.

BACKGROUND
Nine out of 10 regions were affected by three
major humanitarian crises: the armed conflict
in the Lake Chad basin involving Islamic
State’s West Africa Province (ISWAP) and
Jama’tu Ahlis Sunna Lidda’awati wal-Jihad
(JAS) armed groups; the armed violence in
the North-West and South-West anglophone
regions; and the 335,000 refugees from the
Central African Republic with limited access
to jobs, food, education, water, sanitation and
hygiene services. In the Far North region,
more than 380,000 internally displaced
people were affected by flooding and a
cholera outbreak. More than 630,000 people
were internally displaced due to armed
violence in the anglophone regions.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Journalists faced attacks in the course of
carrying out their professional duties.1

118

Martinez Zogo, a journalist and head of
privately-owned radio station Amplitude FM,
was abducted by unidentified men on 17
January and his mutilated body found five
days later in the suburbs of Yaoundé. He had
been investigating and reporting on the
alleged embezzlement of hundreds of billions
of CFA francs by political and business
figures close to the government. The head of
the General Directorate for External Research
(Cameroon’s counter-intelligence agency),
and a prominent media mogul and business
tycoon were arrested and charged with
complicity in Martinez Zogo’s torture and
remanded in custody. On 3 February, the
body of Jean-Jacques Ola Bébé, a priest and
radio presenter and former colleague of
Martinez Zogo’s, was found near his home in
Mimboman, a suburb of Yaoundé. Shortly
before his death he had made public
comments about Martinez Zogo’s murder.
There was no official communication about
the launch of an investigation into this
murder.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
In March, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention stated that the detention of
anglophone journalist Thomas Awah Junior
was arbitrary, and asked the Cameroonian
authorities to “release [him] immediately and
grant him the right to obtain compensation.”
He had been sentenced by a military court in
May 2018 to 11 years in prison on charges of
“terrorism, hostility to the fatherland,
secession, revolution, insurrection, spreading
false news, and contempt for civil authority”.
Dozens of other anglophone people,
including protest leaders Mancho Bibixy, Tsi
Conrad and Penn Terence Khan, were still
arbitrarily detained. They had been
sentenced by a military court in Yaoundé to
15 years in prison, following their convictions
in 2017 and 2018 for “acts of terrorism,
secession, spreading false information, and
contempt for public bodies and officials” in
the context of the armed violence in the
North-West and South-West anglophone
regions.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Anglophone activist Abdul Karim Ali was still
in pretrial detention since his arrest on 11
August 2022, after he appeared in a video
accusing the Cameroonian military of torture.
He was charged by a military tribunal
alongside two of his colleagues for “hostility
towards the homeland”, “failure to report”,
“secession” and “rebellion”.
At the end of the year, 43 activists and
opposition leaders were still arbitrarily
detained after being sentenced by a military
court for taking part in a march on 22
September 2022, organized by the Cameroon
Renaissance Movement opposition party.

RIGHT TO LIFE
NORTH-WEST AND SOUTH-WEST REGIONS
In the two anglophone regions, both defence
and security forces – sometimes in
collaboration with local militias – and armed
separatists carried out unlawful killings and
murders.2
In June, at least 25 people were killed, 20
houses burnt down, and 2,500 people
displaced due to armed violence in the village
of Kedjom Keku, North-West region,
according to the OCHA. Armed separatists
targeted people they accused of not siding
with them, collaborating with the army, or not
paying the “liberation tax”.
On 6 August, the authorities exhumed the
bodies of nine people, including five
government officials, who had been abducted
by armed separatist groups in June 2021.
On 4 October, armed separatists gathered
inhabitants of the town of Guzang, NorthWest region together and shot dead two
men.3
On 6 November, 25 people were reportedly
killed in Egbekaw Village near Mamfe, SouthWest region by suspected armed separatists.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
FAR NORTH REGION
Armed groups affiliated to ISWAP and JAS,
descended from Boko Haram, continued to
carry out attacks on villages along the border
with Nigeria and on islands in Lake Chad.
According to the OCHA, between 1
December 2022 and 30 November 2023,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

more than 280 civilians were killed by armed
groups and more than 210 abducted.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
Between January and July, at least 13 violent
incidents against educational establishments
were reported in the North-West and SouthWest regions, including the abduction of
children and teachers, allegedly by armed
separatist groups. In September, armed
separatists forced schools to close for two
weeks, and killed, abducted or physically
assaulted several people for not obeying the
lockdown, according to the OCHA. In both
regions 2,245 schools remained closed due
to the armed violence.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
On 9 September, a French court ordered the
rubber plantation company Société
Financière des Caoutchoucs – of which palm
oil producer Société Camerounaise de
Palmeraies is a subsidiary – to pay €140,000
to 145 villagers who were deprived of their
land and suffered environmental pollution.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
On 12 June, the National Communication
Council threatened to suspend media outlets
if they continued to broadcast “programmes
promoting homosexual practices”. The same
month, the French ambassador for LGBTQ+
rights cancelled his visit to Cameroon after
the authorities opposed the planned
programme of activities.
1. Africa: Anti-Corruption Fight in Peril – Crackdown on Anti-Corruption
Human Rights Defenders in West and Central Africa, 11 July
2. Cameroon: With or Against Us: People of the North-West Region of
Cameroon Caught Between the Army, Armed Separatists and Militias,
4 July
3. “Cameroon: The unlawful killings of two people by separatists must
not go unpunished”, 6 October

CANADA
Canada

119

Systemic racism and discrimination of
Black and racialized people persisted.
Wet’suwet’en territory remained under
threat from pipeline construction. Violence
against Indigenous women continued and
the fate of missing Indigenous children
remained unresolved. The human rights of
asylum seekers and migrants were violated
and two-spirit, lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans,
queer, questioning, intersex and asexual
(2SLGBTQQIA+) people faced
discrimination and violence. Canada did not
meet emissions targets. Canadian
corporations were linked to alleged human
rights abuses abroad.

DISCRIMINATION
In March, a grievance by Black and
racialized workers claiming systemic racism,
discrimination and sexism against the
Canadian Human Rights Commission was
upheld.
In June, the Quebec government tabled Bill
32 requiring health and social services
institutions to adopt a “cultural safety
approach” towards Indigenous Peoples, but
failed to recognize the existence of systemic
racism and discrimination. The Quebec
government had yet to adopt Joyce’s
Principle to ensure Indigenous Peoples had
access to healthcare and social services
without discrimination.1
While the Quebec government adopted Bill
14 to combat racial profiling by police
officers, the Quebec Minister of Public
Security asserted that there was “no systemic
racism”. An independent report revealed that
racialized individuals were more likely to be
stopped by police than White people.
A lawsuit filed by Black federal public
service employees alleging systemic
discrimination was ongoing.
In July, the Canadian Human Rights
Tribunal approved a CAD 23.3 billion
settlement to compensate more than
300,000 First Nations children who had been
subject to discrimination by the government.

120

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Violence against 2SLGBTQQIA+ people was
pervasive. Alarming incidents of hate
occurred, ranging from vandalism of Pride
flags to protests at children’s drag story-time
events. In September, large-scale protests
took place aimed at eliminating sexual
orientation and gender identity and
expression curricula and policies from
schools. Saskatchewan and New Brunswick
passed legislation prohibiting 2SLGBTQQIA+
youth from having their gender and pronouns
recognized without parental consent.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
The construction of the Coastal GasLink
pipeline continued without the Wet’suwet’en
Hereditary Chiefs’ free, prior, and informed
consent. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police
and private security officers intimidated and
harassed Wet’suwet’en land defenders.2
Several land defenders went on trial in May
and October for protecting Wet’suwet’en
territory against pipeline construction. One
was found not guilty in November; the others
were still awaiting decisions and could face
prison sentences if found guilty.
The UN Special Rapporteur on the rights of
Indigenous Peoples urged Canada to address
the “epidemic” of violence against
Indigenous women, noting the increase in
missing and murdered Indigenous women
and girls, and the high rates of sexual assault
and exploitation experienced by Indigenous
women, girls and 2SLGBTQQIA+ people near
pipeline construction sites. Only two of 231
Calls for Justice had been implemented four
years after the final report of the National
Inquiry into Missing and Murdered
Indigenous Women and Girls.
Canada’s National Action Plan for the UN
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples did not include accountability
mechanisms and free, prior, and informed
consent.
The Independent Special Interlocutor for
Missing Children and Unmarked Graves and
Burial Sites recommended the creation of a
legal framework to protect unmarked graves
and support Indigenous-led search

The State of the World’s Human Rights

operations for missing children. Despite a
legal agreement in April providing a
framework for the search of burial sites, the
Kanien'kehá:ka Kahnistensera (Mohawk
Mothers) experienced difficulties in accessing
the necessary archives and a lack of
collaboration from stakeholders.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The Safe Third Country Agreement (STCA)
was expanded to the entire US and Canadian
borders, including waterways. Asylum
seekers crossing the border through nonofficial entry points are sent back to the USA
unless they can avoid detection for 14 days.
In June, the Supreme Court ruled not to
overturn the STCA.
The Canada Border Services Agency
(CBSA) continued to detain asylum seekers
and migrants for indefinite periods on
administrative grounds. In February, a
coroner’s inquest recommended an end to
the use of jails for immigration detention after
a refugee with mental health disabilities died
after years of incarceration in immigration
detention. Ontario, Quebec, Saskatchewan
and New Brunswick announced an end to
their immigration detention arrangements
with CBSA. By July 2024, people will no
longer be incarcerated in these provinces’
jails solely on immigration grounds.3
Migrants’ precarious migratory status
exposed them to human rights violations. The
Quebec government continued to exclude
refugee claimant families from statesubsidized childcare and migrants with
irregular status were denied healthcare.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
Canadian corporations abroad were linked to
alleged human rights abuses including forced
labour, displacement, sexual assault,
environmental damages, and killings. In July,
the Canadian Ombudsperson for Responsible
Enterprise (CORE) launched investigations
into Canadian corporations’ involvement in
the alleged human rights violations against
the Uyghur people in China.
The effectiveness of CORE remained
concerning. The UN Special Rapporteur on

The State of the World’s Human Rights

the rights of Indigenous Peoples identified
several shortcomings of CORE, including a
lack of protective mechanisms for individuals
filing complaints and the inability to compel
companies to provide witnesses and
documents.
Canadian company Ivanhoe Mines was
linked to human rights violations as a result
of the expansion of copper mines in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.4
Bill S-211 became law in May, but failed to
sufficiently tackle forced and child labour in
supply chains.
Canada failed to introduce mandatory
human rights and environmental due
diligence legislation, which should apply to
Canadian companies’ domestic and
extraterritorial operations.

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
Canada continued to export weapons to
countries where there was a substantial risk
of them being used to commit or facilitate
serious violations of international human
rights or humanitarian law. Arms worth USD
1.2 billion were exported to Saudi Arabia,
representing 57% of total arms exports. Since
February, approximately USD 1 million of
military goods, including “riot control agents”,
were approved for export to Peru amid
repression of protests. Canada issued 315
export permits to Israel for weapons and
military technology in 2022and approved
over USD 21 million worth of military exports
to Israel between October and December
2023. .

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Canada was severely impacted by forest fires,
which covered 18.4 million hectares. The
fires had serious human rights impacts and
displaced numerous Indigenous communities
including the Fort Chipewyan community in
Alberta and the Uashat mak Maniutenam
community in Quebec.5
According to the Office of Auditor General,
Canada will miss its target of 40-45%
reduction in emissions by 2030 and net zero
by 2050, with the oil and gas sector
continuing to be the highest emitter. Canada

121

was one of five countries that will see an
increase in fossil fuel production and
subsidies for domestic and overseas projects
in 2024. Canada was expected to reach
record emissions levels in 2028 with plans to
dig 8% more wells in the next year alone.
1. Overview of Human Rights in Canada 2023, 25 September (French
only)
2. Canada: “Removed From Our Land for Defending it”: Criminalization,
Intimidation and Harassment of Wet’suwet’en Land Defenders, 11
December

Clashes between Coalition of Patriots for
Change-affiliated armed groups and
government forces, aided by their allies,
continued. As of October, 504,992 people
were internally displaced. The International
Monetary Fund gave financial support as part
of an overall USD 191 million aid plan to
avert a humanitarian crisis.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY

The right to freedom of expression was
curtailed. Restrictions were imposed on
freedom of peaceful assembly in the
context of a new constitution. The security
situation deteriorated with grave human
rights violations and abuses committed by
all parties to the armed conflict. Four
people were brought before the Special
Criminal Court for crimes under
international law. Sexual and gender-based
violence remained widespread. Around 2.4
million people were food insecure.

In February, a journalist who wrote about
corruption in the National Assembly fled the
country while on parole, following threats
from an unidentified source. He had been
sentenced in 2022 to two years’
imprisonment and a hefty fine on charges of
defaming the assembly’s first deputy
chairman.
Another journalist was barred from
parliament in March after he investigated
alleged failures in the management of the
assembly’s budget.
A third journalist was arrested and detained
for six days in March, accused of working for
a newspaper considered to be a dissident
publication, and for which he no longer
worked. In 2021, the government had
blocked online access to the newspaper.
During the referendum campaign,
opposition parties belonging to the
Republican Bloc for the Defence of the
Constitution organized a demonstration in the
capital, Bangui, on 14 July. The authorities
banned the protest on grounds of the security
situation and the “subversive” nature of the
demonstration. They threatened to “bring the
offenders into line”.

BACKGROUND

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS

In January, the president declared that
corruption must be curbed in view of
dwindling state resources. In May, parliament
adopted anti-corruption legislation.
In July a new constitution that could allow
the president to run for a third mandate was
approved by over 95% of voters in a
referendum. The political opposition
challenged the legality and fairness of the
process.

According to the UN Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA), the human
rights situation deteriorated, with an increase
in violations and abuses committed by all
parties to the conflict. MINUSCA recorded at
least 103 summary executions between
February and June carried out by the Central
African army and armed groups. During the
same period, 13 civilians working on a

3. “Quebec, New Brunswick to end immigration detention in provincial
jails”, 13 June; “Ontario win a ‘tipping point’ in movement against
immigration detention”, 16 June
4. DRC: Powering Change or Business as Usual, 11 September
5. “Health risks from Canadian wildfires an indictment of climate
change failures”, 7 June

CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC
Central African Republic

122

The State of the World’s Human Rights

mining site in the village of Chingbolo, 25km
from Bambari, were killed in an armed
attack. The government blamed members of
the Coalition of Patriots for Change who
denied responsibility.
The UN said it recorded 75 attacks
allegedly by armed groups against
humanitarian workers or their property
between January and June. At least 17
health centres were attacked and looted for
which armed groups were believed to be
responsible.
According to OCHA, by 31 August, 19
civilians, including 11 children had been
killed in 54 incidents and accidents involving
explosive devices.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
During the year, the Special Criminal Court
(SCC), a UN-backed hybrid court mandated
to investigate and prosecute crimes under
international law and other serious human
rights violations in the country since 2003,
announced the arrests of four men accused
of war crimes and/or crimes against
humanity. They are Abdoulaye Hissène,
former leader of the Popular Front for the
Rebirth of the Central African Republic,
Vianney Semndiro, a former head of the
Central African Armed Forces, and two
fighters from the Anti-Balaka group,
Philemon Kahena and François Boybanda.
On 16 June, the court passed its first
decision on reparation for victims in the trial
against Issa Sallet Adoum, Yaouba Ousman
and Mahamat Tahir, members of the Return,
Reclamation and Rehabilitation armed group
(known as 3R). The defendants had been
convicted in November 2022 of crimes
against humanity and war crimes committed
during the massacre of at least 46 civilians in
2019. In October 2023, they were ordered
jointly and severally to pay compensation to
the victims or their heirs.
In August, the SCC Assize Division heard
the case of Kalité Azor and his codefendants, all members of the Patriotic Rally
for the Renewal of the Central African
Republic armed group. They were handed

The State of the World’s Human Rights

over to the SCC in May 2020, accused of war
crimes and crimes against humanity.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
The Gender-based Violence Information
Management System recorded 5,928 cases
of sexual and gender-based violence between
January and May. Rape and sexual violence
accounted for more than 40% of cases, and
95% of survivors were women and girls. In
August, OCHA said that two people were
subjected to such violence in the Central
African Republic (CAR) every hour.
In June, the UN announced that its Office of
Internal Oversight Services had collected
evidence of rape, incriminating 11 Tanzanian
peacekeepers deployed on a temporary base
in western CAR. The 60 members of the
alleged perpetrators’ unit were confined to
base and later repatriated.

RIGHT TO FOOD
According to UN figures, around 2.4 million
people were food insecure, including
622,000 people who were living in an acute
food insecurity situation due to the armed
conflict, rising prices and floods, among other
things. In November, 20% of the USD 303
million provided to CAR for humanitarian aid
was earmarked for food security.
The International Rescue Committee said in
April that CAR was increasingly vulnerable to
the impacts of global warming, posing a
threat to food security.

CHAD
Republic of Chad
Victims’ families were still awaiting justice
for alleged unlawful killings by security
forces during demonstrations in October
2022. The rights to freedom of expression,
association and peaceful assembly
continued to be restricted. Clashes in the
south caused the deaths of more than 100
villagers. The right to food security was
threatened by rising prices, poor rainfall,
the mass arrival of refugees from Sudan and

123

a lack of humanitarian assistance. Early
marriages and gender-based violence
continued at high levels.

BACKGROUND
In March, the president of the transitional
regime pardoned 380 alleged members of
the rebel group Front for Alternative and
Concord in Chad sentenced in 2022 to
various terms of imprisonment. On 17
December, the country held a referendum on
a new draft constitution, ahead of presidential
elections promised for 2024. According to
the World Bank, inflation was set to rise from
5.8% in 2022 to 13.2% in 2023, with food
inflation expected to reach 13.9%.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE, AND
REPARATION
At the end of the year, no concrete progress
had been made in an investigation
announced by the minister of justice the day
after the 20 October 2022 demonstrations,
during which, according to the National
Human Rights Commission, at least 128
people were killed. Victims’ families, still
waiting for answers, said they were afraid to
ask the authorities to explain the lack of
progress. On 20 October 2023, several
Chadian human rights organizations
denounced the fact that no members of the
defence and security forces had yet been
prosecuted for alleged unlawful killings.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
Some 259 people arrested for attending the
banned demonstrations in October 2022 and
tried behind closed doors in Koro Toro were
pardoned in April; 119 others were pardoned
in July.
In July, two demonstrations scheduled for
the same date, organized by the Rally for
Justice and Equity and the Party of
Democrats for Renewal, were banned by the
Ministry of Public Security. According to the
Ministry, these two political parties did not
exist legally and had not met the conditions
for authorization of a demonstration, a
statement disputed by the two party leaders.
In August, a demonstration planned by the

124

Revolutionary Movement for Democracy and
Peace was banned on the grounds that it was
likely to disrupt public order.
On 1 August, the authorities stated that
organizers of banned demonstrations could
be punished by imprisonment of between six
months and two years, contrary to
international human rights standards.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
On 25 August, the High Media and
Audiovisual Authority suspended popular
news website Alwihda Info for eight days over
its publication of two articles: one, reporting
the removal of a colonel, was accused of
“undermining cohesion and discipline” in the
army, the other of making “insulting remarks”
about the president. On 26 August, Alwihda’s
editor was allegedly subjected to a car chase
by security agents, forcing him to take refuge
with strangers for several hours. Another
journalist for the website was prevented from
covering an event organized by the Ministry
of Transport in the north of the country on the
same day.
A journalist working for the TV channel
Toumaï was released in May, having been
arrested for recounting what he experienced
during the October 2022 demonstrations.
However, he received telephone threats and
was forced to leave the country for his safety
and security after speaking to media outlets
about ill-treatment during his arrest and
detention in Koro Toro prison.

RIGHT TO LIFE AND SECURITY OF THE
PERSON
According to OCHA, at least 135 people were
killed, 359 injured and more than 26,000
displaced between January and June during
clashes reported in southern departments
bordering the Central African Republic
(CAR). Survivors reported that the attackers
were sometimes members of armed groups
present in the CAR and sometimes groups of
herders fighting for access to grazing land.
The survivors complained of lack of timely
protection of the population by security forces
when alerts were raised and poor judicial

The State of the World’s Human Rights

response when the suspected perpetrators
were allegedly identified.

RIGHT TO FOOD
Food insecurity worsened due to factors
including oil price inflation and a
humanitarian crisis in the east of the country,
with Chad hosting more than 400,000
refugees from the conflict in Sudan.
OCHA reported in October that food
insecurity and malnutrition were affecting
some 5.7 million people in Chad, 2.1 million
of whom were in a critical situation.
According to the Famine Early Warning
System Network (FEWSNET), poor rainfall
and continuing conflict were likely to lead to a
further deterioration in food security
throughout the country. The crisis response
proved insufficient. FEWSNET reported
reduced food supplies and cash transfers,
while OCHA stated that only 31.8% of the
necessary international humanitarian funding
had been secured. As of September,
international funds assigned to food security
in Chad totalled USD 96.9 million, despite
the identified requirements amounting to
USD 225 million.

psychological violence and 24% denial of
opportunity, resources and/or services; for
example, women being denied their share of
inheritance or young girls being prevented
from going to school.

CHILE
Republic of Chile
Legislation increased protection for the
police. Impunity persisted for human rights
violations committed during protests in
2019. A plan for the search for forcibly
disappeared people was presented.
Refugees and migrants were still subject to
discriminatory measures and faced
obstacles to international protection.
Violations of the rights of LGBTI people,
Indigenous Peoples and women continued.
Chile’s position on new mining projects was
inconsistent.

BACKGROUND

According to a February report by the Group
Emergency Rehabilitation Development,
access to reproductive health for young
people was poor and characterized by a
succession of economic, social, family, and
political constraints.
According to the report, 24.2% of women
aged between 20 and 24 were married
before the age of 15. The figure was 25% in
rural areas and 21% in urban areas.

On 17 December, by a vast majority, Chile
rejected a proposal for a new constitution; the
1980 constitution remained in force.
The government declared a state of
emergency in several regions of the country.
The 50th anniversary of Augusto Pinochet
coming to power by force was
commemorated.1 Historical denial about
human rights violations during that period
increased.
The government introduced a bill to reform
anti-terrorism legislation. No significant
progress was made in the reform of antidiscrimination law.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE

Victims of gender-based violence continued
to live in fear of reporting assaults, for social
reasons or due to a lack of support from law
enforcement or traditional authorities.
According to the Gender Based Violence
Information Management System, 1,879
cases of gender-based violence were
reported between January and June. Of
these, 34% involved physical assault, 27%

In April, the Naín-Retamal Law was approved
with the stated aim of protecting the police.
The law increased penalties for crimes
against the police, established privileged selfdefence in favour of the police regarding the
use of force, and modified the crime of
unlawful coercion.2
No progress was made towards a
comprehensive reform of the Carabineros

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS

The State of the World’s Human Rights

125

(police force), but the government did
introduce bills to regulate the use of force for
safeguarding public order and security.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Impunity continued for most human rights
violations committed during the 2019 social
upheaval. According to the Attorney General’s
Office, as of December, out of 10,142
complaints relating to violations committed at
that time, charges were filed in only 127
cases, resulting in 38 convictions and 17
acquittals.
Convictions were handed down against
Carabineros officers for human rights
violations committed in 2019 against Josué
Maureira and Mario Acuña. A nullity appeal
filed in defence of the army officer who shot
Carlos Astudillo was rejected. In La Serena,
four army officers were convicted for crimes
of unnecessary violence committed in the
context of the 2019 protests. Under the NaínRetamal Law, a court acquitted five members
of the Carabineros from Padre Hurtado
municipality, who had been accused of
unlawful coercion during the 2019 upheaval.
The Metropolitan North Central Prosecutor’s
Office continued investigating the alleged
crime of unlawful coercion and crimes
against humanity regarding former members
of the President Piñera administration and
Carabineros high command for their role
during the 2019 upheaval. Ricardo Yáñez,
general director of the Carabineros, did not
attend most of the summons to testify as a
defendant, and in another case exercised his
right to remain silent. No formal charges were
presented against Carabineros high
command.3
The Roundtable for Integral Reparation
delivered its conclusions, but no progress
was made on a reparation policy for victims
of human rights violations committed during
the upheaval.4
The national search plan for people forcibly
disappeared during the regime of Augusto
Pinochet (1973-1990) was presented and its
implementation remained pending. The
government announced the National Memory

126

and Heritage Policy to protect memorial sites
relating to this period.
A bill was introduced to conditionally lift the
secrecy over the testimonies of torture victims
collected by the Valech Commission, a
national commission mandated to document
political detentions and torture during the
Pinochet era.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
The government announced the members of
the Commission for Peace and
Understanding, established to seek a political
solution regarding the demands put forward
by the Mapuche people.
Chile recognized the Selk’nam as
Indigenous Peoples and included them as
recipients of the legal rights assigned to
Indigenous Peoples.
In February, a group of Mapuche people
from the El Roble-Carimallín lof (the basic
form of Mapuche social organization)
protested outside Carimallín private land, in
the community of Río Bueno, where the
Norwegian company Statkraft planned to
install a hydroelectric plant. The Mapuche
claimed the project was situated in a sacred
and culturally significant area. Carabineros
broke up the demonstration with tear gas and
riot guns, injuring four Mapuche people.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In February, the government deployed
military troops along its borders with Bolivia
and Peru to prevent the irregular entry of
migrants and refugees, mostly affecting
Venezuelans seeking protection.5
Venezuelan nationals continued to face
obstacles to protection, including the
requirement to report their irregular entry into
the country to access the asylum procedure.6
These obstacles, together with the low rate of
recognition of refugee status, have hindered
access to education, health services and
employment for Venezuelans in Chile.7
The National Public Prosecutor’s Office
gave the order to request pretrial detention
for foreign nationals charged with crimes if
they do not have a national identity card.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

In June, a biometric registration process
was implemented for foreigners aged over 18
who had entered Chile through unauthorized
border crossings before 30 May 2023. This
caused concern in the context of the
government’s restrictive practices and
proposals regarding migrants and refugees,
including irregular expulsions.
The government issued the National
Migration Policy´s decree in December, which
enforced measures such as biometric
registration and the creation of a committee
in charge of expulsions.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
After a judgment from the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights, the government
acknowledged Chile’s responsibility for
violating the rights to equality and nondiscrimination in the case of Sandra Pavez
Pavez, a teacher who was discriminated
against because of her sexual orientation.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Women in Chile continued to be affected by
gender-based violence. A bill to progress
towards a comprehensive approach to
addressing violence against women was still
pending approval in Congress.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
The Comprehensive Sex Education Bill
announced in 2022 had not been passed by
the end of the year.
Chile made no progress in adopting a legal
framework to fully decriminalize abortion and
ensure equal and barrier-free access to safe
abortion services.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
A law on the protection of human rights
defenders had not been passed by the end of
the year. The government did, however, start
drafting a protocol for the protection of
human rights defenders, the environment,
communicators, and justice system
operators.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
The government rejected the Dominga
mining project in the Coquimbo region
because of its environmental impact, but
approved the Los Bronces Integrado mining
project in the Metropolitan region, despite
opposition by environmental organizations.
Chile announced its implementation plan for
the Escazú Agreement.
1. “Chile: 50 years since the coup d’état, exercising historical memory is
vital for the country’s future”, 8 September
2. “Chile: Bill on privileged legitimate defence could increase police
abuses and impunity for these crimes”, 30 March
3. “Chilean prosecutor must act against impunity”, 4 October
4. “Chile: Comprehensive reparation for human rights violations
committed in the context of the social upheaval”, 31 May (Spanish
only)
5. “Peru/Chile: Authorities must end militarization of borders in
response to arrival of people in need of protection”, 27 April
6. Americas: Regularization and Protection. International Obligations for
the Protection of Venezuelan Nationals, 21 September
7. Chile: “No One Wants to Live in Hiding”: Lack of Protection for
Venezuelan Refugees in Chile, 7 March

CHINA
People’s Republic of China
National security continued to be used as a
pretext to prevent the exercise of rights
including freedoms of expression,
association and assembly. Both on- and
offline discussion of many topics was
subject to strict censorship. Human rights
defenders were among those subjected to
arbitrary detention and unfair trials. The
human rights situation in the Xinjiang
Uyghur Autonomous Region remained grave
and there was no accountability for grave
human rights violations committed against
Uyghurs, Kazakhs and other predominantly
Muslim ethnic minorities in the region. UN
experts raised new concerns that
government policies and programmes were
contributing to the destruction of the
language and culture of ethnic groups,
including Tibetans. Women’s rights activists
were subjected to harassment, intimidation,

127

arbitrary detention and unfair trials. Civic
space in Hong Kong became ever more
curtailed as the authorities maintained
wide-ranging bans on peaceful protests and
imprisoned pro-democracy activists,
journalists, human rights defenders and
others on national security-related charges.
They also sought the arrest of opposition
activists who had fled overseas. The Hong
Kong courts ruled in favour of some LGBTI
people’s rights in several landmark cases.

BACKGROUND
China experienced a serious economic
downturn and youth unemployment reached
a record high at 21.3% among 16- to 24year-olds. Labour strikes also reached the
highest number in recent years as factory
closures and wage cuts drove workers’
protests.
The continued lack of transparency of the
Chinese Communist Party and the
government was demonstrated by the
sudden disappearances from public life of
foreign minister Qin Gang and minister of
national defence Li Shangfu, and the sudden
death of former premier Li Keqiang.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
Chinese authorities continued to severely
curtail rights to freedoms of expression,
association and peaceful assembly, including
through the abusive application of laws often
under the pretext of preserving national
security.
People who participated in events to
commemorate the victims of an apartment
block fire in Urumqi, the capital of the
Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region, in
November 2022 and associated protests
against restrictive Covid-19 policies (known
as the A4 protests or White Paper Revolution
due to protesters holding blank sheets of
paper) continued to face harassment. Among
the dozens of mainly young protesters
believed to have been detained were Cao
Zhixin, Li Yuanjing, Zhai Dengrui and Li Siqi,
who were released on bail in April after being
held for approximately four months.

128

In June, a foreign ministry spokesperson
confirmed that Kamile Wayit, a Uyghur
university student, had been found guilty in
March of “promoting extremism” ostensibly
for posting a video about the A4 protests on
the Chinese social media platform, WeChat.
Kamile Wayit, who was reported to be
suffering from depression and other health
problems, was sentenced to three years in
prison.1
In August, China’s legislature announced
proposed amendments to the Public Security
Administrative Law to ban acts, clothing and
speech that is “detrimental to the Chinese
national spirit or hurts the feelings of the
Chinese people”. Chinese legal experts raised
concerns that the lack of definition or scope
of certain of the proposed revisions would
give the authorities excessive powers to
restrict freedoms.
Social media users were subjected to
further regulation with the introduction in July
by China’s cyberspace regulator of new
guidelines to regulate “self-media” (zimeiti)
blogs and social media accounts, making
account holders responsible for ensuring that
posts are factually correct and sources
identified when posting about current affairs
or international politics. Social media
companies subsequently introduced new
policies requiring influencers and others with
large numbers of followers to disclose their
real names, raising concerns about right to
privacy.
The targeting of journalists continued,
including in connection with geopolitical
tensions. In June, India’s formal media
presence in China ended with the expulsion
of a Hindustan Times journalist amid tensions
between the Chinese and Indian
governments. In October, Australian journalist
Cheng Lei, who had worked at Chinese stateowned television network CGTN, was
released. She had been detained in August
2020 for allegedly “supplying state secrets
overseas”.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The government continued to systematically
target human rights defenders amid efforts to

The State of the World’s Human Rights

crush dissent and stifle civic space. Multiple
cases of prosecutions, including of lawyers,
scholars, journalists, activists and NGO
workers, on vaguely defined national security
charges, took place during the year.
Prominent activists were sentenced to long
prison sentences, including legal scholar Xu
Zhiyong and human rights lawyer Ding Jiaxi
who were sentenced to 14 and 12 years’
imprisonment respectively in April after being
found guilty in 2022 of “subversion of state
power”. They were among dozens of people
targeted after attending an informal gathering
in 2019 where the state of civil society and
current affairs in China were discussed.2
In June, human rights lawyer Chang
Weiping was sentenced to three and a half
years’ imprisonment for “subversion of state
power” after sharing details of torture he said
he was subjected to while detained in 2020
in relation to the same gathering. His
sentencing took place nearly one year after
he was convicted in a closed-door trial.3
In April, police detained human rights
lawyer Yu Wensheng and his wife Xu Yan on
their way to meet diplomats at the EU
delegation in the capital, Beijing. In October,
they were charged with “picking quarrels”
and “inciting subversion of state power”. Yu
Wensheng had been previously imprisoned
for his human rights work.
Citizen journalist Zhang Zhan, who was
detained in May 2020 and later sentenced to
four years’ imprisonment, was admitted to a
prison hospital in Shanghai in July due to the
effects of her ongoing hunger strike.
In September, the trial began of prominent
#MeToo activist and journalist Sophia Huang
Xueqin and labour rights activist Wang
Jianbing. The two were arrested in
September 2021 and charged with “inciting
subversion of state power” in connection with
their involvement in trainings on non-violent
protest and participation in private gatherings
in Wang Jianbing’s house to discuss
shrinking civil society space.4
In October, veteran human rights lawyer Li
Yuhan was sentenced to six and a half years’
imprisonment for “picking quarrels and
provoking trouble” and “fraud”. Li Yuhan,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

aged in her seventies and suffering from poor
health, had been detained since late 2017
during which time she was denied regular
access to lawyers and medical treatment and
allegedly subjected to other forms of illtreatment.5
There were concerns that legal
amendments would further facilitate the
targeting of human rights defenders. The
Counter-Espionage Law, which had been
used against human rights defenders in the
past, was revised in April to include an
expanded scope of espionage activities and
provide more powers to investigate
espionage-related matters.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
In May, the CEDAW Committee raised
concerns about reports of intimidation,
harassment and sexual and gender-based
violence against women human rights
defenders, as well as harassment for
engagement with the Committee.
In February, authorities permitted women’s
and health rights defender He Fangmei to
meet her lawyers for the first time after nearly
two and a half years in detention. She was
awaiting the verdict of her May 2022 trial on
charges of “bigamy” and “picking quarrels
and provoking trouble” in connection with
her campaigning for safe vaccines and for
justice for children, including her daughter,
whose health she believed had been
damaged by unsafe vaccines. Following He
Fangmei’s detention, authorities reportedly
placed her two young daughters in a
psychiatric hospital and her son in foster care
and denied other family members access to
them.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In October, 18 UN experts called on China
not to forcibly repatriate North Koreans
following reports that China had sent back
over 500 people, mainly women, to North
Korea, despite previous warnings that the
returnees could face harsh punishments
including enforced disappearance, torture
and other ill-treatment and possible
execution (see North Korea entry).

129

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
There were ongoing concerns about the
repression of dissent overseas, including
pressure by the Chinese authorities on other
countries to forcibly repatriate Chinese
nationals who faced arbitrary detention,
torture and other human rights violations if
returned. In July, human rights lawyer Lu
Siwei was detained by police in Laos and
forcibly repatriated to China in September
where he was detained for several weeks.
Although released on bail, Lu Siwei’s freedom
of movement and expression remained
severely restricted.6
In July, the family of Yang Zewei were
informed that he was detained in a juvenile
detention centre in Hunan’s Hengyang city.
This followed reports that he was arrested in
Laos in May after launching an online
campaign to end internet censorship in
China.

ETHNIC AUTONOMOUS REGIONS
XINJIANG UYGHUR AUTONOMOUS REGION
Amnesty International found no evidence of
progress in implementing recommendations
contained in the OHCHR’s 2022 report which
documented possible crimes against
humanity against members of Uyghur and
other predominantly Muslim groups in the
Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region. In
September, the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights called again for “strong
remedial action”. In the meantime,
systematic repression of Uyghurs, Kazakhs
and those from other predominantly Muslim
ethnic minority groups continued and
impunity remained entrenched. During a visit
to Urumqi in August, President Xi called on
local authorities to strengthen curbs on
“illegal religious activities”.
Up to 1 million people had been arbitrarily
detained in internment camps and prisons
since the crackdown began in 2017 and
there were further detentions and unfair trials
in 2023. In June, a court in Urumqi
sentenced Uyghur student Zulyar Yasin to 15
years’ imprisonment for “separatism”. In July,
his mother, Rahile Jalalidin, was taken away

130

by the police after protesting about her son’s
sentence.
In February, state security police detained
ethnic Kazakh journalist and artist Zhanargul
Zhumatai from her mother’s home in Urumqi
after she communicated with contacts
overseas and spoke out against the
appropriation of land from Kazakh herder
communities around Urumqi for the
construction of roads and hydropower
electricity projects. Zhanargul Zhumatai was
previously detained for over two years in an
internment camp, where she developed heart
problems reportedly due to lack of medical
care.
The use of forced labour of Uyghurs
continued to be reported by independent
researchers and media sources. In
September, an ILO delegation visited Xinjiang
Uyghur Autonomous Region to hold
“technical discussions” about the
implementation of ILO Conventions 29 and
105 relating to forced labour and ratified by
China in 2022.
TIBET
The extent of discrimination against and
restrictions of the rights of Tibetans
increasingly undermined their cultural
identity and language. In February, five UN
experts wrote to the Chinese government
raising concerns about labour transfer
programmes under which millions of rural
Tibetans were allegedly removed from their
homes and traditional livelihoods and placed
in low skilled, low paid manufacturing jobs.
The experts noted that the practice may
negatively affect Tibetan minority languages,
cultural practices and religion, and could
amount to trafficking of persons for forced
labour.
In March, the UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights raised concerns
about the negative impact of poverty
alleviation schemes and resettlement,
ostensibly to enable ecological restoration, on
the lives and livelihoods of small-scale
farmers and herders, including Tibetan
nomads. The Committee urged an immediate
halt to non-voluntary resettlement and
relocation of these communities. It also

The State of the World’s Human Rights

raised concerns about reported campaigns to
eradicate Tibetan culture and language, the
closures of schools teaching in Tibetan and
other minority languages, and assimilation
programmes including the coerced
residential school system imposed on Tibetan
children.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In February, two students filed a lawsuit
against the Ministry of Education, seeking to
overturn disciplinary action against them “for
violating university rules” after they
distributed rainbow flags on Tsinghua
University campus in 2022. Information
about the lawsuit on social media was
censored.
The authorities also maintained pressure on
LGBTI groups. In May, the Beijing LGBT
Center, one of the oldest and largest LGBTI
advocacy and support organizations in China,
announced that it was closing “due to forces
beyond their control”. In August, on Qixi –
China’s Valentine’s Day – WeChat banned the
accounts of several LGBTI groups including
Trans Brotherhood China, Beijing Lesbian
Centre and the Beijing branch of Trueself
without giving reasons.

DEATH PENALTY
Information on the use of the death penalty
was limited as figures on the number of
sentences and executions remained
classified as state secrets. The death penalty
remained applicable for 46 offences,
including non-lethal offences such as drug
trafficking that do not meet the threshold of
the “most serious crimes” under international
law and standards.
The state media reported some cases in
which individuals were sentenced to death.
They included Yu Huaying who was
sentenced to death in September by the
Guiyang Intermediate People’s Court for
abducting and trafficking children in the
1990s.
In December, the Philippines government
announced that China had executed two
Filipinos for drug-trafficking offences after

The State of the World’s Human Rights

ignoring its appeals for the sentences to be
commuted.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
The UN Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights raised concerns about unsafe
working conditions and widespread
harassment in the workplace, including
sexual harassment of women, and
insufficient labour inspection mechanisms to
investigate allegations of violations of relevant
law and regulations. The Committee also
raised concerns about the lack of sufficient
accident and medical coverage, especially for
informal sector workers, and inadequate
social security coverage including for rural to
urban migrant workers.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
A report published in February by Global
Energy Monitor and the Centre for Research
on Energy and Clean Air found that coal
power plant construction in China in 2022
was six times higher than in the rest of the
world combined. In September, China’s
climate envoy Xie Zhenhua said that
completely phasing out fossil fuels was
“unrealistic”. China resumed the
construction of temporarily halted coal-fired
power plants and allowed the construction of
new plants domestically and abroad, despite
a recommendation in February by the UN
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights to suspend permissions and pause
financing for coal-fired power plants.

HONG KONG SPECIAL ADMINISTRATIVE
REGION
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION, ASSOCIATION AND
ASSEMBLY
The Hong Kong authorities continued to use
the 2020 National Security Law (NSL), as
well as colonial-era sedition provisions in the
Crimes Ordinance and other restrictive laws,
against pro-democracy campaigners,
journalists, human rights defenders and
others.
In the largest national security prosecution
to date, the trial of 47 pro-democracy
advocates began in February. All were

131

charged with “conspiracy to commit
subversion” under the NSL in relation to their
involvement in unofficial political party
primaries for the 2020 Legislative Council
elections that were ultimately postponed.
Most were detained for over two years before
the start of the trial, and some faced up to life
imprisonment if found guilty.7
The repeatedly delayed trial on national
security and sedition charges of Jimmy Lai,
publisher and founder of the now closed prodemocracy newspaper Apple Daily, began in
December, one year after it was originally
scheduled. He has been detained since
August 2020. In March, five UN human
rights experts wrote to the Chinese
government to express their grave concern
about the arrest, detention and multiple
prosecutions of Jimmy Lai in apparent
connection with his criticism of the Chinese
government and support for democracy in
Hong Kong.
In March, national security police arrested
two men for “sedition” for possessing banned
children’s books whose authors and
publishers were convicted of sedition in
2022.8 Both were released on bail but could
face up to two years in prison.
Prosecutions of members of pro-democracy
and human rights groups continued even
though most such groups had ceased to
operate after the introduction of the NSL in
2020. On 4 March, three members of the
Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic
Democratic Movements in China (Hong Kong
Alliance) – Chow Hang-tung, Tang Ngokkwan and Tsui Hon-kwong – were found
guilty of failure to comply with a 2021 police
request under the NSL to provide information
about the group’s membership, funding and
activities. Chow Hang-tung, former vice-chair
of the Hong Kong Alliance, refused to comply
with bail conditions that restricted her right to
freedom of expression and therefore
remained in detention pending the outcome
of her appeal. She was subjected to solitary
confinement on multiple occasions,
amounting to a total of 82 days.
On 1 March, the Hong Kong authorities
lifted Covid-19 pandemic-related regulations

132

on public gatherings. However, the right to
protest remained highly restricted and an
atmosphere of intimidation prevailed. In
March, the Hong Kong Women Workers’
Association called off a march to mark
International Women’s Day, apparently due to
police concerns that “violent groups” would
be present and threats that participants may
be arrested.
In June, the Hong Kong government sought
a court order to ban the popular prodemocracy protest song “Glory to Hong
Kong”, and threatened to prosecute anyone
who performed, broadcast or published it
under the NSL or sedition laws.
On 4 and 5 June, police detained at least
32 people near Victoria Park, where the
annual candlelight vigil to commemorate the
Tiananmen crackdown was held until it was
banned in 2020. The police claimed that
those detained were “displaying protest items
loaded with seditious wordings, chanting and
committing unlawful acts”. All were
subsequently released without charge.
In June, 10 former staff members and
others linked to the 612 Humanitarian Relief
Fund (set up to assist participants in the
2019 pro-democracy protests with legal and
other costs but disbanded in 2021) were
arrested on suspicion of “conspiracy to
collude with a foreign country or with external
elements” under the NSL and of “inciting a
riot”. They were accused of accepting
donations from foreign organizations in order
to provide financial assistance to individuals
who had fled Hong Kong or organizations
advocating for sanctions against Hong Kong
officials.
In July, five UN experts wrote to the Chinese
and Hong Kong governments to raise
concerns about the human rights
implications of the proposed Regulation of
Crowdfunding Activities issued in December
2022. They particularly highlighted the risks
to the freedoms of association, peaceful
assembly and expression of applying vaguely
defined national security and
counterterrorism grounds as a primary
criterion for assessing the nature and
purpose of crowdfunding activities.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

In September, Zeng Yuxuan, a 23-year-old
mainland Chinese postgraduate law student
at the Chinese University of Hong Kong,
pleaded guilty to sedition and was sentenced
to six months’ imprisonment for planning to
display a banner depicting a sculpture by a
Danish artist commemorating the Tiananmen
crackdown. Zeng Yuxuan was due to be
released in October having served most of
her sentence in pretrial detention, but was
deported to mainland China where she was
believed to be held incommunicado. Her
transfer was thought to be the first time
someone from mainland China has been
deported from Hong Kong after being
convicted of sedition.
In December, police arrested seven people
and issued arrest warrants for two others who
were living overseas for “inciting others not to
vote, or to cast an invalid vote” in District
Council elections.
REPRESSION OF DISSENT
Targeting of overseas critics of the Hong Kong
authorities continued. In July, police issued
arrest warrants for eight activists, including
three former legislators, who were self-exiled
in Australia, the UK and the USA. They were
accused of violating the NSL and a reward of
HKD 1 million (approximately USD 128,228)
was offered for information leading to their
arrest. In October, four UN experts expressed
serious concerns about the issuing of the
warrants and called for the NSL to be
reviewed. In December, five more overseas
Hong Kong activists were added to the
wanted list with the same rewards offered.
In November, 23-year-old student Yuen
Ching-ting was sentenced to two months in
prison for posting “seditious” messages on
social media while she was studying at a
university in Japan. Yuen Ching-ting, who
pleaded guilty to posting 13 messages in
support of Hong Kong independence, was
arrested in March after returning to Hong
Kong to renew her identity card.
In December, prominent student activist
Agnes Chow posted on Instagram an account
of how she was required to travel to mainland
China and participate in “patriotic” events
and visits to have her passport returned in

The State of the World’s Human Rights

order to study in Canada. Agnes Chow was
imprisoned in 2020 but remained under
surveillance after she was released on bail in
2021 and her passport was confiscated.
Following her arrival in Canada she said that
she feared that she may never be able to
return to Hong Kong and would be at risk of
human rights violations if she did.
LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
There were positive developments for LGBTI
people’s rights resulting from court decisions
on challenges against discriminatory policies
and practices. In February, the Court of Final
Appeals found that the government had
breached the rights of two transgender
people by rejecting their applications to
amend their gender on their identity cards
because they had not undergone full
reassignment surgery.
In August, in a case brought by a lesbian
couple, the High Court legally recognized the
non-gestational parent as the second female
parent of their child. In another landmark
ruling in September, the Court of Final
Appeals declined to recognize same-sex
marriage but ruled that the government had a
constitutional duty to provide an alternative
legal framework for same-sex relationships to
be recognized. The Court set a timeline of
two years for the rights of same-sex couples,
including access to hospitals and inheritance,
to be protected on equal terms with those of
opposite-sex couples.9
In two other cases in October, the Court of
Appeal declared discriminatory the
government’s denial of same-sex married
couples’ rights to rent and own public
housing. It also ruled in favour of granting
equal inheritance rights.
1. “China: Further information: Uyghur student convicted for promoting
extremism: Kamile Wayit”, 4 July
2. “China: Heavy prison sentences for human rights activists
‘disgraceful’”, 10 April
3. “China: Jailed sentence for lawyer who reported being tortured ‘an
outrage’”, 8 June
4. “China: #MeToo and labour activists facing ’baseless’ trial must be
released”, 21 September
5. “China: After six years deprived of liberty, human rights lawyer finally
sentenced”, 25 October

133

6. “China: Human rights lawyer extradited and detained: Lu Siwei”, 27
October
7. “Hong Kong: Case against 47 pro-democracy figures must be
dropped as politically motivated trial begins”, 6 February
8. “Hong Kong: Arrests for possession of ‘seditious’ children’s books a
new low for human rights”, 17 March
9. “Hong Kong: Same-sex marriage ruling a moment of hope for LGBTI
rights”, 5 September

COLOMBIA
Republic of Colombia
Despite peace talks and ceasefires, civilians
continued to be affected by armed conflict
and human rights violations, including huge
numbers of people being forcibly displaced.
The government failed to implement
comprehensive police reform but presented
regulatory changes on the use of force
during protests. Indigenous Peoples, Afrodescendants and peasant communities
continued to be disproportionately affected
by armed conflict. Femicide remained a
huge concern, as did violence against
LGBTI people. The Constitutional Court
confirmed the decriminalization of abortion
up to 24 weeks, but barriers to access
remained. Attacks against human rights
defenders persisted and the government
announced measures to protect them.
Progress was made in investigations for war
crimes and crimes against humanity.
Barriers for Venezuelans trying to access
international protection or alternative
regularization mechanisms remained.

BACKGROUND
During 2023, the first year of Gustavo Petro’s
presidency, armed groups strengthened and
conflicts between them increased, while
confrontations between the Colombian
Armed Forces and armed groups decreased,
according to the Ideas for Peace Foundation.
Peace talks between the government and
the National Liberation Army advanced and a
six-month ceasefire was implemented in
August. In May, a ceasefire between the
government and the Central General Staff

134

armed group was partially
suspended following the latter group’s killing
of four Indigenous teenagers. In September,
negotiations between the government and the
Central General Staff resumed and a threemonth ceasefire was implemented. The
government tried to open negotiations with
six other armed groups, among them urban
armed groups in Medellín, Quibdó and
Buenaventura cities, and the Colombian
Gaitanist Self-Defence Forces.
Local elections were held in October, with
some reports of violence in various regions of
the country.
The Inter-American Court of Human Rights
declared that Colombia was responsible for
the elimination of the Patriotic Union political
party and human rights violations against
more than 6,000 members and militants of
the party, and their families, over a 20-year
period.
The government presented bills proposing
social reforms on health, labour, pensions
and education, but none had been approved
by the end of the year.
According to the World Bank, Colombia had
one of the highest occurrences of extreme
weather events in South America.
Approximately 84% of its population was
exposed to multiple climate hazards.
The government started a consultation and
implementation process for the gradual
energy transition plan. The main objectives of
the plan were increasing investments in
decarbonization, gradual substitution of fossil
fuel usage, and flexibilization of regulations
for investments in renewable energies.

EXCESSIVE AND UNNECESSARY USE OF
FORCE
Temblores NGO and the Institute for
Development and Peace Studies reported
191 cases of police violence during the first
year of President Petro’s government (August
2022 to July 2023), a 59% decrease
compared with the previous year. Forty-three
cases occurred in the context of protests.
Racial profiling and policing continued to
affect racialized groups.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

In February, the Coalition for Police Reform,
a group of human rights and police violence
victims’ organizations, presented a set of
proposals for police reform with a human
rights and intersectional approach. Despite
this, the government failed to implement legal
reforms for a comprehensive police reform.
Various initiatives changing the structure and
operation of the police were approved,
among them the introduction of a new police
manual about the use of force during
protests.

confirming and strengthening their protection
against discrimination.

DISCRIMINATION

In May, a declaration of national emergency
on gender-based violence was included in
the National Development Plan 2022-2026.
The Colombian Observatory on Feminicides
reported 483 gender-based killings of women
and girls in 2023 up to November.
The Regional Information Network on LGBTI
Violence reported 21 killings of LGBTI people
in Colombia in 2023 under the category of
“violence due to prejudice” (violence that
seeks to harm a person due to the negative
perception of their gender identity or sexual
orientation).

The Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights expressed concerns about the impact
of violence in the Pacific region on
Indigenous Peoples, Afro-descendants and
peasant communities.
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Indigenous Peoples were affected by violence
and armed conflict throughout the country. In
September, Indigenous communities in the
Nariño province were forcibly displaced
during armed violence. Some families
reported being forcibly confined.
The Awá people, in the south of the Pacific
region, continued to be attacked by armed
groups and demanded faster and better
institutional response. Since 2009 the
Constitutional Court had said that attacks
against the Awá people have put them at risk
of being exterminated.
The Constitutional Court issued a ruling
protecting the right of Indigenous Peoples to
prior consultation regarding the
administrative configuration of their
territories.
AFRO-DESCENDANTS’ RIGHTS
In July, protests started after two incidents of
possible racist police violence against two
Afro-descendant young men in Valle del
Cauca and Bolívar provinces, resulting in
their deaths. Ilex Legal Action, Temblores
NGO and the Institute on Race, Equality and
Human Rights reported police involvement in
systemic racism.
PEASANTS’ RIGHTS
The constitution was amended to recognize
peasants as a collective rights-holder,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
In June, a bill was passed extending the
reach of the gender-parity rule to more
decision-making authorities. The genderparity rule establishes a mandate
guaranteeing a certain quota of women at the
highest level of decision-making inside the
Colombian institutional hierarchy.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In February, Doctors Without Borders
reported the persistence of obstacles in
accessing sexual and reproductive health
services, including abortion, in Colombia. The
Just Cause Movement identified at least nine
barriers to abortion, among them a lack of
awareness of the legal framework by health
professionals, unnecessary requirements by
health administrators, and undue delays in
the provision of services.
In August, the Constitutional Court
confirmed the decriminalization of abortion
up to 24 weeks of pregnancy. The court
reversed decisions that jeopardized the legal
effect of a decriminalization decision made in
2022.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In April, a person received a university
degree matching their non-binary identity for
the first time in Colombia.

135

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The Ministry of the Interior announced the
strengthening of the collective protection
programme for human rights defenders from
grassroots organizations and communities,
who are often defending land and territory,
increasing the target for the number of
applicants to be covered by collective
protection measures by the end of the year.
The collective protection programme aims to
prevent human rights violations and abuses
against grassroots organizations and
communities, identifying risk factors and
adopting measures to prevent them from
materializing or mitigate their effects. The
programme coexists with individual
protection programmes.
In August, the National Commission on
Security Guarantees approved a national
policy for dismantling criminal organizations
that, among other human rights abuses, have
attacked human rights defenders.
In September, the Ombudsperson’s Office
issued a national early alert regarding the
crisis of violence against human rights
defenders.
Despite the government’s measures to
mitigate the risks to human rights defenders,
violence against them remained at very high
levels.1 According to the We Are Defenders
Programme, there were 632 aggressions
against human rights defenders up to
September, of which 123 resulted in death.

FORCED DISPLACEMENT
Forced displacement continued to
disproportionately affect Afro-descendants
and Indigenous Peoples. UNHCR, the UN
refugee agency, reported that up to
November, 163,719 people had been forcibly
displaced in Colombia during 2023.
According to the Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights, citing OCHA, 45% of all
displacement victims in 2023 were Afrodescendants and 32% were Indigenous
Peoples.
In May, 300 families, comprising
approximately 1,500 people, most of them
Afro-descendants or Indigenous Peoples,
were forcibly displaced in the context of

136

confrontations between the National
Liberation Army and the Colombian Gaitanist
Self-Defence Forces armed groups in Sipí
municipality, Chocó province. In July,
authorities in Antioquia province reported
that at least 53 families had been forcibly
displaced from their homes in the
municipalities of Segovia and Remedios
because of confrontations between the same
armed groups.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
The Ideas for Peace Foundation reported a
significant increase in forced displacements,
forced confinements, massacres and killings
of social leaders during the first year of
Gustavo Petro’s presidency. Although several
ceasefires were put in place during the year,
their impact on the civilian population was
limited.
In October, the UN Secretary General
informed the UN Security Council that the
ceasefire between the National Liberation
Army and the government, in place since
August, had de-escalated the confrontation,
but had done little to decrease the impact of
the armed conflict on the civilian population.
Between July 2022 and June 2023, the UN
Mine Action Service registered 119 victims of
anti-personnel mines throughout the country,
including four children and 33 Indigenous
and Afro-descendant people. In June, an
anti-personnel mine perimeter set up by the
Central General Staff armed group was
reported in Nariño province.
In May, the Ombudsperson’s Office called
on the various armed groups to stop the
illegal recruitment of children. The Coalition
against the Recruitment of Children in the
Colombian Armed Conflict registered 112
cases in the first semester of 2023.
Armed curfews and community
confinements continued, mainly because of
fighting between armed groups in rural areas.
In June, the Ombudsperson’s Office warned
of an armed curfew enforced by the National
Liberation Army in Chocó province, affecting
nearly 5,000 people in the Nóvita
municipality. UNHCR reported that as of

The State of the World’s Human Rights

November, 72,389 people had been forcibly
confined in Colombia during 2023. In
September, citing OCHA, the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights said that Afrodescendant people made up 37% of all
confinement victims in 2023 and Indigenous
Peoples represented 25%.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Several times during the year, the Foundation
for Freedom of the Press recommended that
President Petro take action to enable the
media and promote freedom of the press,
instead of creating a hostile environment,
following clashes on social media between
the president and media representatives and
journalists.
The Foundation for Freedom of the Press
reported 398 attacks on freedom of the press
in Colombia as of October, including 132
cases of threats, 41 cases of harassment,
and 51 cases of stigmatization.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Between April and June, the Kroc Institute for
International Peace Studies registered some
progress in the implementation of the 2016
Peace Agreement, in light of the approval of a
constitutional reform creating the Rural and
Agrarian Jurisdiction. One of the main
concerns was the implementation of the
provisions regarding ethnic and gender
perspectives. As of June, fulfilment of 74% of
the provisions on the ethnic perspective and
70% on the gender perspective was deemed
unfeasible within the agreed term.
The UN Secretary General reported to the
UN Security Council that the Unit for the
Search of Persons Deemed as Missing had
recovered 86 bodies of missing persons
between March and June, and had handed
over the remains of seven to the relatives
between June and September. Since 2018,
the unit had recovered 929 bodies and
handed over 196. In October, the Kroc
Institute for International Peace Studies
reported the start of the implementation of 28
regional search plans.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

The Institute for Development and Peace
Studies documented, as of December, the
killings during 2023 of 44 former members of
the guerrilla group FARC-EP who had signed
the 2016 Peace Agreement. In March,
former members of the group raised alarms
about the deterioration of their security
situation.
In September, the government presented a
bill aimed at reforming the Victims and Land
Restitution Law. According to the
government, the objectives were to secure
adequate funding for the implementation of
the law and to implement durable solutions
and differential approaches.

IMPUNITY
In February, the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace (JEP) charged 10 former FARC-EP
members with war crimes and crimes against
humanity for their involvement in attacks
against Indigenous Peoples, Afrodescendants and peasant communities in
Cauca and Valle del Cauca provinces.
In May, an adversarial trial was started by
the JEP against a former congressman for his
alleged participation in a crime against
humanity of persecution against a political
group in Caquetá province, committed jointly
with members of FARC-EP.
In July, the JEP charged 10 former FARCEP members with war crimes and crimes
against humanity regarding 349 kidnappings
committed in Tolima, Huila and Quindío
provinces. The JEP also charged 15 former
FARC-EP members with war crimes and
crimes against humanity regarding the
implementation of a social and territorial
control policy in Nariño province affecting
Indigenous Peoples, Afro-descendants,
peasant communities, urban and rural
populations, women and girls, LGBTI people,
nature, and ancestral and collective
territories.
In August, the JEP charged nine military
men, including one former general, with war
crimes and crimes against humanity
regarding 130 extrajudicial executions and
enforced disappearances committed in
Antioquia province. An adversarial trial also

137

started against a former army colonel who did
not accept his responsibility for extrajudicial
killings and enforced disappearances in the
Caribbean region.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In August, Panamanian authorities claimed
that the number of people crossing the
Darien Gap had increased substantially and
had already exceeded the total number of
crossings in 2022. By the end of the year, the
number had reached 520,000.
Throughout the year, civil society
organizations called for more transparency
around the number of Venezuelans living in
Colombia. According to R4V platform,
Colombia was home to 2.89 million
Venezuelans. Nevertheless, Venezuelans
faced barriers to access international or other
complementary forms of protection that
would allow them to regularize their status
and access their rights in Colombia.2
1. Colombia: Hope at Risk. The Lack of a Safe Space to Defend Human
Rights in Colombia Continues, 9 November
2. Americas: Regularization and Protection: International Obligations for
the Protection of Venezuelan Nationals, 21 September

CONGO
Republic of the Congo
Demonstrations organized by an opposition
political party were banned. Opposition
leaders remained arbitrarily detained. A
triple epidemic hit the south of the country,
highlighting the poor state of health
centres. In Vindoulou, a lead recycling
company continued its activities despite the
absence of environmental impact
assessments. Little progress was made on
women’s rights.

BACKGROUND
In August, the Congolese Labour Party of
President Sassou Nguesso, in power for 38
years, obtained an absolute majority of the 72
seats at the senatorial elections, which took
place against an economy marked by high

138

inflation. Petrol prices rose by 25%, which in
turn led to an increase in the cost of essential
goods. A coalition against the high cost of
living, comprising eight human rights NGOs,
was set up in August to protest against the
increases in the price of petrol. In May, three
opposition political parties launched a
petition against alleged government
corruption. In October, the country held the
Three Basins Summit, bringing together
leaders from the Amazon, Congo and the
Borneo-Mekong South East Asia regions.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
The Mouvement Républicain, an opposition
political party, called for a demonstration on 9
March to pay tribute to Guy Brice Parfait
Kolelas, the main opposition figure, who died
during the March 2021 presidential election.
The demonstration was banned by the
prefect of Brazzaville, as was a further
demonstration planned for 23 March. The
prefect accused the Mouvement Républicain
of undermining social cohesion and
disturbing public peace, and stated that it did
not have the documentary evidence to justify
its status as a political party. A coalition of
NGOs requested that the authorities adopt a
law that would simply require the notification
of planned demonstrations to the authorities,
instead of the need to request authorization
beforehand, thereby complying with
international human rights standards.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
André Okombi Salissa, a candidate in the
2016 presidential election, remained in
detention despite the UN Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention declaring his detention as
arbitrary and calling for his immediate release
as well as compensation for the time he
spent in detention. In 2019 he was
sentenced to 20 years’ hard labour for
“undermining the internal security of the
State and illegal possession of weapons and
munitions of war”.
Jean-Marie Michel Mokoko, another
candidate in the 2016 presidential election,
also remained in detention, despite the UN
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention

The State of the World’s Human Rights

declaring his detention as arbitrary. He was
sentenced in 2018 to 20 years’ imprisonment
for the same crime of “undermining the
internal security of the State and illegal
possession of weapons and munitions of
war”.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In June an epidemic of shigellosis, cholera
and typhoid spread across the south of the
country. According to the WHO, as of 29
August a total of 2,389 suspected cases had
been reported, including 52 deaths in the five
departments of Niari, Pointe-Noire, Bouenza,
Kouilou and Brazzaville. More than 90% of
cases were concentrated in Dolisie, capital of
Niari department.
On 26 July, the artist “DSP Malakay”, who
had criticized the poor management of the
epidemic by the local authorities in Dolisie –
in particular the lack of medical resources to
treat patients – was arrested by the police in
Dolisie and detained before being released
without charge on 2 August.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
The residents of Vindoulou, a district of
Pointe-Noire, launched legal proceedings in
June to shut down a lead recycling plant
located near their homes and a school.
According to information provided by the
residents’ collective, lead tests were carried
out on at least 15 residents, all of whom had
levels 10 times higher than the limits
recommended by the WHO. Residents also
denounced the lack of an environmental
impact assessment for the plant, which has
been in operation since 2013.
In April, the NGO the Centre d’Actions pour
le Développement published a report on the
management of the Ntokou-Pikounda
national park. According to the NGO, the
Indigenous population had been the victim of
several forced evictions, excessive use of
force and arbitrary detention by eco-guards.
Congo participated in the One Forest
Summit, held in Libreville in Gabon in March.
Among the summit’s recommendations were
the creation of a €100 million fund to finance
“biodiversity credits” for countries that had

The State of the World’s Human Rights

safeguarded their forests and biodiversity,
and the creation of 10 million jobs in green
industries. The NGO CCFD-Terre Solidaire
denounced in a statement what it considered
potential “greenwashing” and highlighted the
absence of the voice of local populations at
the summit.
At the conclusion of the Three Basins
Summit in October, participants committed to
preserving their forests while also insisting on
the need for greater international cooperation
to protect the forests.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
A World Bank report published in March,
titled Women, Business and the Law 2023,
welcomed the adoption of the 2022
Mouebera law on combating violence against
women. It noted, however, that women do not
receive the equivalent of full pay from their
employer while on maternity leave and
recommended reform of the labour code and
the social security code to end
discrimination, including the dismissal of
workers due to pregnancy.

CÔTE D’IVOIRE
Republic of Côte d’Ivoire
Opposition party supporters were arbitrarily
arrested for exercising their rights to
freedom of expression, association and
peaceful assembly. Courts declared illegal
the forced evictions of hundreds of families
in Abidjan. Over 7 million people were
enrolled in the universal health coverage
programme although concerns remained
that some treatments were ineligible for
reimbursement. The government took
measures to contain the rising cost of
essential consumer products. While cocoa
cultivation continued to contribute to
deforestation, a government-led project
sought to conserve and increase forest
stock. Child labour persisted in various
sectors of the economy.

139

BACKGROUND
In September, peaceful municipal and
regional elections were held three years after
violent clashes erupted during presidential
elections.
The remains of 47 people were returned to
their relatives following judicial investigations
into the 2010/2011 post-electoral crisis in
which hundreds of people were unlawfully
killed.
By November, UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, had registered over 30,000 people
who were seeking refuge from the armed
conflict in Burkina Faso.
Over 30 people died due to floods between
April and July, according to the government.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
On 24 February, the authorities arbitrarily
arrested 31 activists from the opposition
African People’s Party-Côte d’Ivoire (PPA-CI).
They were arrested after they
had accompanied their party’s secretary
general to attend a court summons for his
alleged role in the attack on a military
barracks in the economic capital, Abidjan, in
2021. On 9 March, 26 of them were
sentenced to two years in prison for
“disturbing public order” but were released
on 22 March after their sentences were
suspended on appeal.1
On 25 February, four people were arrested
after they flew the Russian flag at a PPA-CI
rally in Yopougon, a suburb of Abidjan. They
were detained at the Abidjan Penitentiary
Centre and released on 22 March without
charge.

FORCED EVICTIONS
In March, a court of first instance in Abidjan
declared the forced evictions of hundreds of
families by the Koumassi town council in
Houphouet Boigny 1 and 2 districts in
Koumassi commune, Abidjan, to be illegal.
The evictions took place in 2021 as part of a
flood prevention and improvement policy.
The Yopougon town council disregarded a
July court of first instance ruling that
declared unlawful the eviction of 178 families

140

from the Banco Nord Extension 2 area. In
September, authorities continued with further
evictions and home demolitions in the area.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The minister of employment and social
protection revealed in October that 7.2
million people had been enrolled in the
Universal Health Coverage (UHC)
programme which was launched in 2022. It
aimed to improve access to quality
healthcare. However, according to media
reports, concerns remained about the small
number of drugs which were eligible for
reimbursement under the programme, and
the limited number of health centres that
accepted UHC payments.

RIGHT TO FOOD
According to the National Institute of
Statistics report, published in December, the
inflation rate reached 4.4% during the year.
In response, the authorities took measures to
protect the population’s purchasing power. In
September, they suspended the export of rice
and sugar until the end of the year, to combat
the rising cost of such products and to
ensure a stable supply to the internal market.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Stage two of the Forestry Investment Project
began in 2023 with financial support from
the World Bank of USD 148 million.
According to the government, the project
aimed to conserve and increase forest stock
and improve the livelihoods of communities
living in targeted forest areas. According to
research published in May in the online
journal Nature Food, “cocoa cultivation is an
underlying driver of over 37% of forest loss in
protected areas in Côte d’Ivoire”. The report
highlighted the need to ensure fairer prices
and to support improved farming practices.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
At the end of his visit to Côte d’Ivoire, the UN
Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of
slavery said he had been informed during his
visit that “child labour persist[ed] in various
sectors of the economy, including agriculture,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

domestic work, street vending and in
artisanal gold mining.” He also raised
concerns “about the fate of girls who have
either been trafficked from countries in the
region to Côte d’Ivoire for sexual exploitation
or who are subject to forced and early
marriage”.
1. “Côte d’Ivoire: Amnesty International demands immediate release of
arbitrarily detained PPA-CI activists”, 13 March (French only)

CROATIA
Republic of Croatia
Summary returns and violence against
refugees and migrants continued. The
government committed to tackling the
growing number of strategic lawsuits
against public participation threatening the
work of journalists and media. Access to
abortion remained restricted. The
government announced measures to
suppress widespread domestic violence.
Victims of wartime rape faced obstacles in
accessing rights. Roma and Serb minorities
continued to experience entrenched
discrimination.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
According to the authorities, the number of
people trying to enter Croatia through
neighbouring countries increased by 70%
compared with 2022, with over 65,000
recorded entries by November. Aid
organizations continued to document
violations against refugees and migrants,
including illegal summary returns, physical
violence, humiliation and theft by lawenforcement officials.
In October, the CERD Committee urged
Croatia to cease collective expulsions and
pushbacks, and investigate incidents of
excessive use of force against refugees and
migrants.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Journalists investigating organized crime and
corruption continued to face harassment,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

including strategic lawsuits against public
participation (SLAPPs). According to a survey
by the Croatian Journalists’ Association, there
were at least 945 SLAPPs against editors and
journalists, mostly filed by public officials.
Defamation remained a criminal offence. In
December, the government adopted the
National Plan on Culture and Media
Development 2023-2027, which included
concrete measures to facilitate early
detection and dismissal of SLAPPs.
In July, the Ministry of Culture and Media
proposed a draft media law, which, among
other things, would allow publishers and
editors to refuse to publish a journalist’s
reports without explanation, and would
require journalists to reveal their sources. The
Croatian Journalists’ Association argued that
the law would seriously undermine
journalistic freedom and encourage media
censorship. The International Federation of
Journalists urged the government to “rethink”
the proposal.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Widespread refusal by individual doctors and
clinics to perform abortions on grounds of
conscience, and the prohibitive cost of the
procedure and medicines, continued to
restrict access to abortion services. Abortion
remained particularly inaccessible in rural
and economically deprived areas.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Domestic violence remained rife. In
September, the government announced a
range of measures to address violence
against women. These included amendments
to the criminal code to classify femicide as a
separate criminal offence and impose longer
sentences for rape, among other measures
aiming to strengthen victims’ rights. Women’s
groups welcomed the measures and urged
the government to adopt a comprehensive
national plan to prevent and combat all forms
of violence against women in line with the
Council of Europe’s Convention on preventing
and combating violence against women and
domestic violence (Istanbul Convention).

141

In September, the Council of Europe Group
of Experts on Action against Violence against
Women and Domestic Violence praised steps
taken to stop domestic violence, but urged
the authorities to do more, including
implementing comprehensive policies to
address all forms of violence against women
and increase the number of shelters and
other support for victims.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Women victims of wartime rape faced
numerous barriers when applying for the
status of civilian victims of sexual violence
during the war, which guaranteed certain
welfare benefits. According to civil rights
organizations, victims had to provide
excessive and difficult to obtain
documentation and witness testimonies,
while some applicants were wrongfully
rejected because they were suspected of
being related to members of the Serb military
or the perpetrator was a member of the
Croatian forces.
The CERD Committee expressed concern
that some provisions of the Law on Civilian
Victims of War were being interpreted in a
discriminatory way against members of the
Serb ethnic minority group and prevented
them from exercising their rights as victims of
war.

DISCRIMINATION
LGBTI PEOPLE
Over 10,000 people gathered in Zagreb in
June to participate in the biggest annual
Pride march to date. The march took place
without incident, but in the weeks
beforehand, LGBTI people faced widespread
discriminatory speech, threats and
harassment, both in public spaces and on
social media platforms.
Conservative groups proposed an initiative
to hold a referendum to constitutionally
define marriage as a lifelong union between a
woman and a man, which would rule out the
possibility of legalizing same-sex marriage.

142

ROMA, SERBS AND ETHNIC MINORITIES
Roma continued to face extreme poverty and
live in substandard conditions in segregated
neighbourhoods and informal settlements
without proper infrastructure.
In October, the CERD Committee expressed
concern about reports of racial discrimination
against members of Roma and Serb
minorities, particularly in employment and
education, as well as the prevalence of
discriminatory speech against minority
groups and non-citizens, including by
politicians and other public figures.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Despite the recent expansion of and a good
potential for renewables, Croatia’s energy
consumption remained dominated by fossil
fuels. Nevertheless, Croatia’s 2030 target of
36.4% for renewables was ambitious and
above the EU goal of 32%.

CUBA
Republic of Cuba
Repression of dissent continued as
activists, political opponents and journalists
were harassed, persecuted and imprisoned.
Human rights defenders faced obstacles
and attacks, and some continued to be
incarcerated without due process. The
economic and humanitarian crisis
continued with shortages of food, fuel and
electricity. Discrimination remained
prevalent, affecting Afro-descendants,
women and girls, LGBTI people, political
dissidents, and members of religious
communities.

BACKGROUND
Cuba lacked a national human rights
institution in compliance with the Paris
Principles, the country remained closed to
international human rights organizations, and
the international media faced obstacles in
monitoring the trials of political dissidents.
In November, the EU and Cuba held their
fourth human rights dialogue, at which the

The State of the World’s Human Rights

EU expressed concern over detentions and
lengthy prison sentences related to protests
in July 2021 (see below, Repression of
dissent).
The year saw the implementation of a new
Penal Code that retained the death penalty,
as well as provisions that limited human
rights and were used to silence and imprison
activists.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
Surveillance and harassment of activists,
opponents, journalists and artists continued
to be widespread. Arbitrary detention and
criminal processes without fair trial
guarantees remained common and people
deprived of liberty faced harsh prison
conditions.
At least 793 people remained in detention
in relation to their participation in the islandwide protests of 11 July 2021, according to
the organization Justicia11J.
On 6 May, the government reacted with
excessive force against people protesting at
the poor living conditions and lack of human
rights in Caimanera municipality,
Guantánamo province. Law enforcement
officials used physical violence, and at least
five demonstrators were arbitrarily detained,
according to the Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights, which condemned the
pattern of repression.
On 26 May, the Cuban legislature approved
a law on social communication that
continued the ban on privately owned media
and established abusive restrictions on public
information and internet use. The law granted
the government power to order
telecommunications providers to stop
servicing users who published information
deemed harmful to public order or morality.
José Daniel Ferrer García, a political activist
and opposition leader, in prison since July
2021 when he was also subjected to
enforced disappearance, was held
incommunicado while his health declined. At
the end of the year, he was still deprived of
his liberty.1
Police commonly issued summons for
journalists and activists to be interrogated in

The State of the World’s Human Rights

relation to their lawful activities. In May,
reporter Yeris Curbelo Aguilera was
interrogated by state security forces after
covering the protests in Caimanera
municipality.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders and activists
continued to be harassed, attacked and
criminalized. On 14 February, state security
agents arrested Josiel Guía Piloto at his home
in Havana. He had previously been arbitrarily
detained in 2011 due to his political dissent.
At the time of his arrest, he was on hunger
strike in protest at the constant harassment
and surveillance to which he was being
subjected.2
The government continued to incarcerate
artists and prisoners of conscience Luis
Manuel Otero Alcántara and Maykel
“Osorbo” Castillo Pérez, who were sentenced
in 2022 to five and nine years in prison,
respectively, in a legal process that did not
respect fair trial guarantees. Their physical
and mental integrity was at risk due to harsh
prison conditions, violence by other
detainees, and poor medical care.3
The authorities rejected the
recommendation by governmental medical
staff to release Loreto Hernández García from
prison due to his frail health. Spouses Loreto
Hernández García and Donaida Pérez
Paseiro, both Black activists, priests and
leaders of the Free Yoruba Association of
Cuba, are prisoners of conscience, detained
since 2021 for peaceful participation in
island-wide protests.4 During 2023, Loreto
Hernández García’s health deteriorated and
both prisoners faced obstacles in
communicating with their families.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
The economic and humanitarian crisis
continued, with shortages of essential goods.
People struggled to find enough food, fuel
shortages made transportation less
accessible, and blackouts were ongoing
throughout the year. In May, the government
stated that essential imports of fuel, food and

143

farm produce were affected by the economic
crisis. The government reiterated the critical
situation in September when further
blackouts were forecast.
The economic crisis affected the health
system and there were reports of shortages of
medical supplies and medicines, as well as
fewer medical staff being available.
In April, the Inter-American Commission on
Human Rights expressed its concerns in a
report on labour and union rights in Cuba
and found significant challenges. The
commission detailed job insecurity, lack of
health and safety measures, unjustified
dismissals on the grounds of political opinion,
violations of the right to freedom of
association, and lack of recognition of the
right to strike, among other concerns.

DISCRIMINATION
Discrimination persisted, affecting in
particular Afro-descendants, women and
girls, LGBTI people, political dissidents, and
members of religious communities.
Afro-descendants continued to suffer the
consequences of systemic and historical
racism. Activists reported that racial
inequalities persisted, creating racial
disparities in political representation, access
to adequate housing, and employment,
among other rights. The state did not collect
and publish data on racial inequalities
disaggregated by race and ethnicity.
Gender-based discrimination continued.
Lawmakers failed to include femicide as a
crime in the Penal Code, while local NGOs
and journalists registered the deaths of at
least 86 women in what appeared to be
gender-based attacks.
1. “Cuba: José Daniel Ferrer held incommunicado for months”, 6 June
2. “Cuba: Ex prisoner of conscience detained”, 17 February
3. “Cuba: Open letter to President Miguel Díaz Canel on human rights of
prisoners of conscience”, 18 May
4. “Cuba: Free the Yoruba prisoners of conscience”, 21 June

144

CYPRUS
Republic of Cyprus
Police reportedly failed to respond
effectively to attacks against migrants,
refugees and other racialized people.
Forcible, summary returns by sea to
Lebanon continued. A new inquest began
into the death of army conscript Athanasios
Nicolaou.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Although the authorities increased the
capacity of the Asylum Service, there was still
a significant backlog in processing asylum
applications.
Cyprus continued forcible, summary returns
by sea to Lebanon. NGOs denounced two
such returns in July and August, stating that,
on 30 July, 73 people sent back to Lebanon
were then forcibly returned to Syria. In
October, NGOs expressed their concern
about Cyprus’s plans to support Lebanese
border management capacity and for joint
border controls.
In 2023, the authorities carried out over
11,000 forced and voluntary returns.
UNHCR, the UN refugee agency, reported
that “increasing numbers of asylum seekers
are at risk of homelessness”, noting the
inadequate social support given to them.
As of October, asylum seekers must wait
nine months (increased from one month)
after submitting their asylum application
before being allowed to work. The Cyprus
Refugee Council expressed concern that this
would push more people into irregular work
and destitution.
In December, amendments to naturalization
rules – passed without civil society
consultation – tightened residency
requirements, and introduced “irregular
entry” as a criterion by which to judge an
applicant’s “good character”, potentially
affecting access to citizenship for refugees,
subsidiary protection beneficiaries and
migrants. Children born in Cyprus to parents
whose entry or stay is irregular – including

The State of the World’s Human Rights

those with one Cypriot parent – continued to
face possible statelessness.
On 27 August and over the following days,
mobs held racist demonstrations and
attacked migrants, refugees, and other
racialized people and migrant-owned
businesses in Chloraka and Limassol. NGOs
complained that police failed to respond
effectively. In November, a trial started
against 13 people charged in connection with
the Limassol attacks.

IMPUNITY
In June, following a police investigation, the
Cyprus Legal Service decided not to reopen
the criminal case regarding the death in
2005 of army conscript Athanasios Nicolaou.
A new inquest into his death started in late
October. A 2022 report by criminal
investigators had concluded that his death
was murder by strangulation and identified
serious flaws in the police investigation.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Between 2006 and December, the remains of
1,044 missing individuals – 751 Greek
Cypriots and 293 Turkish Cypriots – were
identified by the Committee on Missing
Persons in Cyprus in its mission to establish
the fate and whereabouts of people who were
subjected to enforced disappearance during
the inter-communal fighting of 1963-1964
and the events of 1974.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In May, the Administrative Court recognized
for the first time environmental NGOs’ right to
file public interest claims in environmental
matters. In October, the Administrative Court
recognized for the first time environmental
NGOs’ right to access official documents of
an infringement case between the Cypriot
authorities and the European Commission in
relation to Cyprus’s failure to fulfil its
obligations under EU legislation on the
protection of natural habitats. Final
judgments by the court of appeal were
pending in both cases. A Eurostat report
published in January revealed that 89% of
Cyprus’s overall supply of energy was from

The State of the World’s Human Rights

fossil fuels – the joint second highest in the
EU. According to experts, insufficiencies
persisted in the designation, conservation
and management of environmentally
protected areas.

CZECH REPUBLIC
Czech Republic
Ukrainian refugees suffered hate speech,
discrimination, harassment and hate crimes
amid rising economic and political tensions.
Recent moves towards a consent-based
definition of rape were inadequate. De facto
segregation of Roma children in education
continued. Equal marriage for same-sex
couples was not permitted. Sterilization was
still a requirement for transgender people
seeking legal gender recognition. The police
were found to be testing facial recognition
technology. Climate action policies
remained inadequate.

BACKGROUND
As part of the UPR process in January, the
Czech Republic committed to improving the
rights of same-sex couples, implementing a
consent-based definition of rape and
outlawing corporal punishment of children.
However, implementation of these
commitments, and some rulings of the
European Court of Human Rights, remained
slow or stalled.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Some 350,000 Ukrainian refugees remained
in the country. Against a background of
economic recession and rising inflation,
Ukrainians were subjected to hate speech,
harassment and hate crimes; in August, two
Ukrainian refugee women were violently
assaulted in the town of Plasy due to their
nationality.
Ukrainian refugees faced obstacles to
integration, including language barriers in
schools. Only low numbers of pupils enrolled
in secondary education. Although the
employment rate among Ukrainian refugees

145

was 64%, this was overwhelmingly in lowpaid and low-skilled jobs.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
The ratification of the Council of Europe
Convention on preventing and combating
violence against women and domestic
violence (Istanbul Convention) was debated
in parliament but faced strong opposition
from government and opposition politicians,
some resorting to disinformation.
The Ministry of Justice proposed a new law
to introduce a consent-based definition of
rape into the criminal code. The bill was
awaiting approval by parliament.
Although the term “domestic violence” was
used in the criminal code, it was not defined.
An amendment to the civil and criminal
codes was in preparation but had not been
brought before parliament by the end of the
year.

DISCRIMINATION
A memorial to the Roma and Sinti holocaust
at the former Lety concentration camp was
nearing completion and due to open early in
2024. In contrast, very little was done to
concretely address the continuing de facto
segregation of Roma children in education.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The Equal Marriage Bill went through its first
reading in parliament. However, the
constitutional amendment to define marriage
as a union between a man and a woman also
passed its first reading, creating uncertainty
for the future of equal marriage rights.
Sterilization was still required by law for
transgender people seeking legal gender
recognition, despite a 2017 ruling by the
European Court of Human Rights that this
was in breach of human rights. The criminal
code still failed to recognize violence directed
at people due to their sexual orientation or
gender identity as a hate crime.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
The minister of legislation created a working
group to establish the post of a children’s

146

ombudsperson, announcing that it would be
in place in 2024.
Corporal punishment of children remained
legal. An amendment to the civil code was
being prepared, which would describe
corporal punishment as “unacceptable” but
not make it punishable by law.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
The law regulating abortion access remained
outdated. Many medical facilities refused to
provide abortions to non-Czech EU citizens
due to incorrect claims by the Czech Medical
Chamber – refuted repeatedly by the Ministry
of Health and the ombudsperson’s office –
that the law did not allow it.

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
The Czech Republic continued to export
arms to Israel, Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates, despite substantial risks that
they could be used in serious violations of
international human rights and humanitarian
law.

MASS SURVEILLANCE
The Ministry of Interior overturned the
police’s decision not to provide information
about their secret use of facial recognition
software. The Ministry was awaiting a
response from the police either providing the
information or a reason not to do so.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
An attempt by the mayor of Prague to restrict
protest marches on a major road in the city
was overruled by the municipal court, which
said that this violated the right to freedom of
assembly without adequate justification.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
The government confirmed it was aiming to
phase out coal use by 2033 and achieve
carbon neutrality by 2050.
The Czech Republic had not yet adopted a
legally binding climate law aimed at setting
specific targets and enacting concrete
measures to tackle climate change.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC OF THE
CONGO
Democratic Republic of the Congo
The human rights situation remained dire.
Persistent large-scale attacks against
civilians by armed groups and the
Congolese security forces fuelled the
humanitarian crisis in which nearly 7
million people were internally displaced and
thousands of others fled the country. Armed
groups killed thousands of civilians, and the
army carried out extrajudicial executions.
Sexual and gender-based violence remained
prevalent, with over 38,000 reported cases
in Nord-Kivu province alone during the first
quarter of the year. The rights to freedom of
expression, peaceful assembly and
association were routinely violated.
Journalists, opposition members and
activists, among others, were subjected to
arbitrary detention and faced unfair trials.
Mining projects in Lualaba province led to
the forced eviction of thousands of people
from their homes and livelihoods, while
Indigenous Peoples faced eviction in the
name of conservation. The armed conflict
continued to devastate children’s right to
education. Natural disasters left hundreds
dead and thousands missing. Prisons were
severely overcrowded and inmates’
conditions were generally appalling. No
meaningful progress was made towards
accountability and justice for victims of
crimes under international law and other
serious human rights violations.

BACKGROUND
Dozens of armed groups remained active,
mainly in the eastern provinces of Ituri, NordKivu and Sud-Kivu. The governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) and
Rwanda exchanged belligerent rhetoric,
accusing each other of supporting armed

The State of the World’s Human Rights

groups. The Congolese authorities used local
militia groups, who clashed with Rwandanbacked March 23 Movement (M23) rebels in
early October, after months of relative calm
on the front lines.
In October, President Tshisekedi announced
that the “state of siege” (a form of martial
law), in force in Ituri and Nord-Kivu provinces
since May 2021, would be “eased”.
In the context of the general elections held
in December 2023, the authorities stepped
up their crackdown on dissenting voices,
further shrinking civic space.
Meanwhile, most of the population was
deprived of social, economic and cultural
rights, including access to adequate food,
clean water, sanitation, electricity, education,
healthcare and housing.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
Armed groups continued to carry out
widespread attacks against civilians, killing at
least 4,000, wounding thousands and
abducting scores of others nationwide. In
Ituri province, the Cooperative for the
Development of the Congo (CODECO), a
predominantly ethnic-Lendu armed group,
targeted members of the rival Hema
community, including within camps for
internally displaced people. In one such
attack on 12 June, at the Lala camp near the
town of Bule, CODECO fighters shot and
hacked to death at least 46 people overnight,
half of whom were children, according to the
Kivu Security Tracker. Armed groups
identifying with the Hema community
retaliated, attacking Lendu villages and killing
scores of people.
In January, in Nord-Kivu province, fighters
of the Allied Democratic Forces, a Ugandan
armed group active in the region since the
1990s with allegiance to the Islamic State
armed group, attacked Makugwe village in
Beni territory. They killed at least 23 people
with machetes, including six women,
according to a local civil society organization.
M23 rebels killed dozens of people in
reprisals against civilians suspected of
supporting rival armed groups or the
Congolese army. According to local civil

147

society groups, they killed at least nine men
on 6 August in Marangara, Rutshuru territory,
while the village was under their control.
In Sud-Kivu province, attacks on civilians by
armed groups affiliated to the Banyamulenge
community on the one hand, and the Bembe
and Fuliro communities on the other, resulted
in casualties on both sides, according to the
UN. In the western region, an armed group
called Mobondo, which arose in the wake of
inter-communal violence between the Yaka
and Teke peoples, killed at least 100 people
between January and October and
committed other serious abuses with
impunity, according to the UN Joint Human
Rights Office. Provincial authorities said that
disputes over land management in Tshopo
province, central DRC, which broke out
between the Mbole and Lengola peoples in
February, resulted in over 500 deaths and
the displacement of 77,000 people.
In July, the body of former minister and
opposition MP Chérubin Okende was found
in his car in the capital, Kinshasa, a day after
his family reported him missing. He was last
seen at the constitutional court, where he
went to meet a judge about the public
declaration of his assets. The authorities’
promise to conduct a prompt, thorough,
effective and transparent investigation into
his murder yielded no results, and no one
was held accountable.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S
RIGHTS
Nearly 7 million people were estimated to be
internally displaced, the highest number in
Africa; most displacements were triggered by
armed conflict. As in 2022, Ituri and NordKivu provinces were most affected with over
500,000 newly displaced people, according
to the UN. In early October, fighting resumed
in Nord-Kivu between local armed groups,
sponsored by the Congolese authorities on
the one hand and Rwandan-backed M23
rebels on the other, leading to the
displacement of 145,000 people in the first
half of the month alone.

148

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Conflict-related sexual and gender-based
violence remained prevalent, including in the
context of the worsening humanitarian crisis.
According to UNICEF, more than 38,000
cases of sexual violence were reported in
Nord-Kivu province alone during the first
quarter of 2023, an increase of 37%
compared with the same period in 2022.
Amid precarious conditions in the camps
around the city of Goma, which hosted
around 600,000 people most of whom were
displaced by M23 attacks, women and girls
were particularly at risk. Hundreds of them
were subjected to sexual violence, including
rape and forced prostitution, while searching
for food, firewood and other essentials. In
May, Doctors Without Borders (MSF) said
levels of sexual violence in internally
displaced people’s camps in and around
Goma reached an unprecedented
“catastrophic scale”; MSF provided care to
674 victims in the last two weeks of April
alone.
In September, the government enacted a
law criminalizing and punishing genderbased intimidation and stigmatization, and
the use of degrading treatment. The law also
punishes forced levirate and sororate
marriages (where a widow is forced to marry
her dead husband’s brother, or a woman is
forced to marry her dead sister’s husband,
respectively); and gender-based harassment
on social media platforms. In the same
month, the criminal procedure code was
amended to exempt victims of sexual and
gender-based violence from the costs of
criminal proceedings, which would be borne
by the state. If implemented, the
amendments promise to strengthen legal
protection against various forms of sexual
and gender-based violence, and ensure
better access to justice for victims.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
On 30 August in Goma, the army attacked
followers of the political and religious group
Messianic Judaic Natural Faith Towards the
Nations. The attacks were carried out ahead
of the group’s planned demonstration against

The State of the World’s Human Rights

the UN Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a
peacekeeping mission. Soldiers killed at least
56 people and wounded at least 85 others
according to officials. Three soldiers,
including a commander, were convicted of
the mass executions following a flawed
investigation and trial.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
In March, President Tshisekedi enacted two
laws that further curtailed the right to
freedom of expression and press freedom.
They included the digital code law, which
carries a sentence of up to six months’
imprisonment for relaying false information
via social media or other electronic
communication.
Demonstrations were routinely banned or
violently dispersed. On 20 May, police and a
youth group allegedly affiliated with the ruling
party attacked protesters in Kinshasa who
were demonstrating against the alleged lack
of transparency in the electoral process.
Opposition parties had organized the
demonstration in which several of their
leaders and supporters were injured.
Francine Naba, a member of the opposition
L’Envol de la RDC (The Rise of the DRC)
party who had attended the protest, was
found dead on 25 May in Kinshasa, a few
hours after she was allegedly abducted by
unidentified assailants. Nobody was held
accountable for her murder.
Between May and July, several opposition
leaders, including Moïse Katumbi, Martin
Fayulu and Matata Ponyo, were prevented by
provincial authorities from entering or holding
meetings and rallies in several provinces.

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND UNFAIR
TRIALS
In September, police arrested journalist
Stanis Bujakera Tshiamala and questioned
him about an article that cited a leaked report
attributed to the National Intelligence Agency
(ANR). The report allegedly implicated the
military intelligence services in Chérubin
Okende’s abduction and murder (see above,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Unlawful attacks and killings) and questioned
the veracity of the authorities’ official version
of his death. Stanis Bujakera was charged
with “forgery”, “spreading rumours” and
“disseminating false information ” although
he was not named as the author of the article
in question. His trial began on 13 October,
and he faced a possible 15-year prison
sentence. He was denied provisional release
several times and remained in detention.
Lens Omalonga, a young activist from
L’Envol party, was arrested in Kinshasa in
May and held incommunicado for six weeks
by the ANR. His lawyer said he was brought
before a judge in July and charged with
contempt of the president and “harmful
imputations” in connection with a social
media post he had shared. He faced
prosecution under the digital code law and
other provisions, and was provisionally
released in December.
Several members of the Tutsi and
Banyamulenge communities were arrested,
or abducted, detained and held
incommunicado; others faced sham trials,
accused of supporting M23 rebels or spying
for the Rwandan government. In May, Lazare
Sebitereko, a prominent civil society member
from the Banyamulenge community in SudKivu province was arrested and transferred to
Kinshasa, where he was held
incommunicado in a military intelligence cell.
At least 21 pro-democracy and opposition
activists were arrested, and some of them
prosecuted on trumped-up charges
connected to their criticism of government
policies. In June, a military court of appeal in
Goma sentenced King Mwamisyo of the civil
society movement Fight for Change (Lutte
pour le Changement), to five years in prison
for “contempt of the army” after he criticized
the state of siege. He had been in prison
since September 2022.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
After a drawn-out process lasting seven
years, the human rights defenders’ law was
enacted in October. The law increased state
control over the status and activities of civil
society organizations and human rights

149

defenders. It required them to register with
the National Human Rights Commission, an
official body, or face criminal prosecution.
Those disseminating information deemed
“defamatory, insulting or slanderous” risked
six months to two years in prison.

FORCED EVICTIONS
The expansion of industrial-scale cobalt and
copper mines in Lualaba province, driven by
the growing global demand for energy
transition minerals, fuelled forced evictions of
people from their homes and farmland. The
rights of thousands of people to adequate
housing and freedom from violence, among
other rights, were violated. The forced
evictions continued throughout the year, and
the authorities and the multinational
companies concerned failed to comply with
legal safeguards prescribed in international
law and domestic legislation to protect people
from forced evictions.1

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In February, a law came into force that
protects and promotes the rights of
Indigenous Peoples, the result of a campaign
by civil society organizations lasting over 30
years. Despite this, systemic abuses against
Indigenous Peoples, particularly in the name
of conservation, continued. The Indigenous
Bambuti people who live in and around
national parks, including Salonga and
Kahuzi-Biega, both World Heritage Sites,
were subjected to persistent violence from
security forces and park rangers, forced
evictions and other abuses.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Thousands of Congolese people continued to
flee the country, seeking asylum, especially in
African countries. According to UNHCR, the
UN refugee agency, between January and
August around 45,000 new refugees arrived
from the DRC to neighbouring countries,
particularly Uganda, Rwanda (see Uganda
and Rwanda entries) and Tanzania.
Meanwhile, the DRC continued to host half a
million people who had fled armed conflict
and persecution from other African countries,

150

in particular South Sudan, the Central African
Republic, Rwanda and Burundi.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
The roll-out of the government’s free primary
education programme continued to flounder
due to poor infrastructure, inadequate state
funding and, most importantly, poor
conditions for teachers. Teachers’ unions
resorted to strike action to push the
government to honour its commitments to
improve their pay, terms and conditions. The
draft budget for 2024 reduced funding for
the education sector from 21.6% to 18.4%.
The persistence and spread of armed
conflict in eastern and western DRC
continued to have a devastating impact on
children’s education. In March, a UNICEF
report said that the education of around
750,000 children was disrupted in two of the
most conflict-affected provinces in the east,
due to mass displacement. Thousands of
schools were attacked, forced to close due to
insecurity, or used as shelters for displaced
people.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Several regions were affected by flooding,
landslides, fires and other natural disasters,
the frequency and scale of which could be
climate-change related.
Tens of thousands of people were displaced
by natural disasters. In May, torrential rainfall
resulted in massive flooding and mudslides in
the towns of Bushushu and Nyamukubi, in
Sud-Kivu’s Kalehe territory. According to the
International Federation of Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies, the disaster left over
400 people dead and more than 2,500
missing; scores of others were injured and
50,000 people were displaced. Thousands of
houses were destroyed or seriously damaged.
In September, heavy rainfall in the town of
Lisala in Mongala province resulted in at least
17 fatalities, according to local authorities.

INHUMANE DETENTION CONDITIONS
Conditions of detention remained appalling
and so overcrowded that some prisons held
2,000% over their intended capacity. Inmates

The State of the World’s Human Rights

suffered a lack of drinking water and
medicines, and some starved to death.
Makala Prison in Kinshasa, with a capacity
for 1,500 people, held over 12,000 inmates
as of October, over 70% of whom were
pretrial detainees. Goma Central Prison, with
a capacity for 300 people, housed over 7,000
inmates, 80% of whom were in pretrial
detention.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In February, the government adopted a Draft
National Transitional Justice Policy, which
provides for the establishment of judicial
mechanisms to deal with the most serious
crimes and human rights violations. No
further steps were taken towards ensuring
accountability and providing access to justice
and effective remedies.
In May, the DRC made a second referral to
the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC (the
first referral was made in 2004) requesting
that investigations into alleged crimes within
the court’s jurisdiction, committed by
Rwandan-backed rebels since January 2022
in Nord-Kivu province, be initiated. The
Office of the Prosecutor committed to
investigate all crimes within its jurisdiction,
whoever the suspected perpetrators may be.
Later that month, the ICC prosecutor
undertook a three-day trip to the country,
meeting Congolese and UN officials,
members of civil society and victims’
representatives. At the end of his visit, on
behalf of the Office of the Prosecutor, he
signed a memorandum of understanding with
the government, designed to strengthen
cooperation and complementarity between
the court and the DRC.
1. Powering Change or Business as Usual? Forced Evictions at
Industrial Cobalt and Copper Mines in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, 11 September

The State of the World’s Human Rights

DENMARK
Kingdom of Denmark
Afghan women and girls were granted
refugee status, and special legislation
granting temporary residency for people
from Ukraine and Afghanistan was
extended. The European Court of Human
Rights opened a case against the Ministry
of Defence for joint responsibility for the
torture of civilians in Iraq in 2004.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In January, the Refugee Appeals Board
changed their rules to grant protection to all
women and girl asylum seekers from
Afghanistan. In March, the Refugee Appeals
Board expanded the number of Syrian
regions considered safe for return to include
the province of Latakia, despite warnings that
asylum seekers could not be guaranteed
safety from persecution by the state due to
their original decision to flee the country.
The authorities further extended the 2021
special legislation granting residency permits
for Afghans until 30 November 2025,
continuing the practice of offering only
temporary residency. In September, special
legislation offering protection to displaced
Ukrainians was extended until March 2025.

DISCRIMINATION
In January, the CERD Committee
recommended that the Danish authorities
improve systematic data collection about hate
crimes and training sessions for police,
prosecutors and judges.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In September, the government responded to
a series of Qur’an burnings with a legislative
proposal criminalizing “improper treatment of
religious scriptures of significant importance
to a recognized religious community”. The
law was adopted by the parliament in
December, although it was criticized for
containing vague language which could have
negative implications for freedom of

151

expression, as well as freedom of assembly
and association. The law also took insufficient
action to tackle anti-Muslim hatred, one of
the underlying reasons for these Qur’an
burnings.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In August, two climate activists were fined for
an earlier act of civil disobedience in 2021,
instead of receiving prison terms demanded
by the state prosecutor.

ARBITRARY DEPRIVATION OF
NATIONALITY
The Supreme Court ruled in March that the
Ministry of Immigration had breached the
principle of proportionality by withdrawing
Danish nationality from a woman in 2020,
who was being held with her two children in
the prison-like camp of Al-Roj in Syria at the
time.
A seven-year-old boy in Al-Roj camp was
the only child of Danish nationality who had
not been offered a return to Denmark
together with his mother.

IMPUNITY
In March, the government announced the
establishment of a committee of experts in
June to revise the Penal Code to include war
crimes, crimes against humanity and torture
as distinct criminal acts.
In October, the European Court of Human
Rights communicated with the Danish
government on the case of Abdulaal Naser
and Others v. Denmark, the so-called “Green
Desert” case, for consideration on whether
the Ministry of Defence is jointly responsible
with the UK government for the torture of
Iraqi civilians detained by Danish troops in
2004 during the Iraq War. As of the end of
the year, the Court had not yet made a
decision on the merits of the case.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In December, the UN Committee against
Torture launched its concluding observations
on Denmark’s eighth periodic report,
expressing concerns about compliance with

152

the convention, particularly about the
treatment of refugees.

DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC
Dominican Republic
Discrimination remained widespread and
structural, particularly affecting Haitians or
Dominicans of Haitian descent. Congress
failed to protect women, children and
LGBTI people from gender-based violence
and hate crimes. Law enforcement officials
continued to use excessive force.

DISCRIMINATION
Discrimination against Haitians or people of
Haitian descent and anti-Black racism
continued. Women and girls, LGBTI people,
migrants, asylum seekers and refugees were
particularly at risk.1
Pregnant and post-partum women seeking
medical attention were discriminated against
if the authorities considered them to be
Haitian. Immigration authorities and law
enforcement officials visited hospitals to
search for migrant women and girls to
arbitrarily arrest and deport them.
In September, seven UN human rights
mechanisms warned about the risk of
refoulement and human rights abuses in
relation to measures against pregnant
women, and called on the authorities to
separate migration control from access to
public services.

ARBITRARY DEPRIVATION OF
NATIONALITY
Ten years since the ruling of the
Constitutional Court that retroactively
deprived thousands of Dominicans of Haitian
descent of their nationality, the government
still had not taken sufficient measures to
mitigate and repair the human rights
violations caused.2 The authorities failed to

The State of the World’s Human Rights

comply with the 2014 ruling on the issue by
the Inter-American Court of Human Rights.
At the end of the year, tens of thousands of
people remained stateless and were targeted
by arbitrary restrictions on their rights to legal
personality, a name, and a life free of
discrimination. The majority were people of
Haitian descent. The Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights urged the
Dominican Republic government to provide
support to stateless persons to regularize
their situation and address the effects of
protracted and intergenerational
statelessness.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED
DISCRIMINATION AND VIOLENCE
Abortion remained prohibited in all
circumstances. Congress failed to amend the
Criminal Code to provide protection against
torture, violence, and discrimination on the
grounds of sexual orientation and gender
identity. Femicide and hate crimes were not
specific criminal offences.
The Committee on the Rights of the Child
voiced concern over the absence of a
minimum legal age for sexual consent and
the high number of cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse of children.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Excessive use of force by law enforcement
officials continued to be reported, with no
progress in combating impunity for these
incidents. In February, a 12-year-old boy died
after suffering gunshot wounds in a police
operation during the carnival in the city of
Santiago. Witnesses said the police failed to
give him first aid.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Nuria Piera, a high-profile journalist who
focuses on corruption and impunity, was
targeted with NSO Group’s Pegasus spyware,
which enables full and unrestricted access to
a device.3 It was the first confirmed case of
its use in the country, but a technical analysis
revealed that the first attack on her devices
occurred in 2020. The Office of the Attorney

The State of the World’s Human Rights

General and the Ministry of Interior and
Police denied involvement in the surveillance.
1. “Americas: States must end racist treatment of Haitian asylum
seekers”, 20 June
2. “Dominican Republic: Authorities must end racist treatment and
guarantee the right to nationality”, 22 September
3. “Dominican Republic: Pegasus spyware discovered on prominent
journalist’s phone”, 2 May

ECUADOR
Republic of Ecuador
Armed forces were deployed throughout the
country and their powers in public security
tasks were expanded. Violence increased in
the lead up to the general elections. Human
rights violations remained unpunished. The
state of crisis in prisons continued.
Indigenous Peoples’ rights continued to be
violated. Flaring of gases during oil
extraction persisted. Authorities failed to
protect human rights defenders. Poverty
and inequality affected much of the
population and gender-based violence
remained prevalent.

BACKGROUND
In May, faced with possible impeachment,
former president Guillermo Lasso dissolved
the National Assembly (Ecuador’s legislative
body) and called elections for August, which
culminated in run-off elections in October.
Daniel Noboa was voted in as the new
president, along with 137 new members of
the National Assembly.
The homicide rate rose sharply, and
authorities responded with emergency
decrees expanding the mandate of the armed
forces. A constitutional reform to grant the
military greater involvement in public security
tasks was approved by the National Assembly
in December. A national referendum to
approve its implementation remained
pending at the end of the year.

153

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
In May, a presidential decree deployed the
armed forces throughout the country,
allegedly to “repress the terrorist threat” in
response to organized crime groups.
Subsequent decrees throughout the year
expanded the mandate of the police and
armed forces to enter private property to
carry out searches, seize property and access
correspondence.1

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
During the months prior to the elections,
several candidates for political office were
attacked or killed, including the seemingly
politically motivated killing in August of
presidential candidate Fernando
Villavicencio.

IMPUNITY
Serious human rights violations committed by
security forces in the context of protests in
2019 and 2022 remained unpunished.
In June, Executive Decree 755 stipulated
that law enforcement officials suspected of
having caused injury or harm to or the death
of a person could only be apprehended or
removed from duty following conviction.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
The authorities declared repeated states of
emergency in prisons in response to several
massacres. In July, 31 prisoners were killed
and dozens wounded in the El Litoral prison
in Guayaquil, and 137 prison guards were
temporarily taken hostage in prisons across
the country. Health services in prisons
remained almost non-existent, and
authorities failed to properly investigate
killings and treat family members of
detainees with dignity.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Indigenous Peoples’ rights were infringed by
extractive projects in their territories. In May,
Executive Decree 754 allowed mining
companies to commence activities without
Indigenous Peoples’ free, prior and informed
consent. Following the decree, police and

154

military operations in the provinces of
Cotopaxi and Bolivar resulted in 18 people
being wounded and two arrests. In
November, the Constitutional Court declared
the decree unconstitutional, but allowed it to
remain in force.
Oil spills in 2020 and 2022 in the Amazon
had still not been investigated, and affected
communities had still not received truth,
justice and reparation.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Authorities failed to respect their commitment
to the global initiative to phase out the use of
flares during the extraction of crude oil by
2030 and continued to allow the flaring of
gases.
In August, during a national referendum, a
majority of voters opted to protect the Yasuní
National Park in the Amazon and prohibit
new oil exploration in the park.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders continued to be
stigmatized, harassed, attacked or killed for
carrying out their work. Defenders of territory,
land and the environment were at particular
risk. Authorities continued to fail to protect
human rights defenders.
In February, Eduardo Mendúa, a leader
from the A’i Cofán Indigenous People, was
shot dead. Mendúa had been vocal in
opposing oil drilling in the area. In April, the
minister of energy and Mines publicly
stigmatized lawyer and environmental activist
Pablo Fajardo as an “international criminal”.2

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Large sectors of the population continued to
face socio-economic obstacles to access their
rights to health, food and water, among
others. Poverty rates remained above preCovid-19 levels as of June 2023, with 27% of
the population living in poverty and 10.8% in
extreme poverty. Public health spending
continued to fall short of the 6% of GDP
target recommended by the Pan American
Health Organization.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

The UN Special Rapporteur on extreme
poverty visited the country in September and
expressed alarm at the enormous disparity in
poverty rates between urban and rural areas.
According to the rapporteur, rural areas
registered rates of multidimensional poverty
as high as 70%, with poverty most
pronounced in areas with large Indigenous
populations. The rapporteur said that the
acute poverty made young people easy
recruits for organized crime and called on the
authorities to continue improving the
progressivity of the tax system.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Several obstacles persisted that inhibited
women from living free of violence. More than
1,500 gender-based killings had been
committed since 2014, according to civil
society organizations.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Date-of-entry eligibility requirements imposed
undue restrictions on the exceptional
temporary residence visa for Venezuelan
citizens (VIRTE), affecting the enjoyment of
temporary protection for more than half a
million Venezuelan nationals living in
Ecuador.3 Lack of regular status prevented
Venezuelan women survivors of genderbased violence from accessing protection
and care services.
1. “Ecuador: Authorities must safeguard human rights amidst preelectoral violence”, 10 August
2. “Ecuador: Ecuadorian human rights defender Pablo Fajardo
stigmatized”, 28 April
3. Americas: Regularization and Protection: International Obligations for
the Protection of Venezuelan Nationals, 21 September

EGYPT
Arab Republic of Egypt
Presidential elections took place in a
repressive environment, with genuine
opposition candidates prevented from
running and the rights to freedom of
expression, association and peaceful

The State of the World’s Human Rights

assembly severely suppressed. Authorities
released 834 prisoners held for political
reasons but arrested over triple that number
during 2023. Thousands of actual or
perceived government critics remained
arbitrarily detained and/or unjustly
prosecuted. Enforced disappearances and
torture and other ill-treatment remained
rampant. Death sentences were handed
down after grossly unfair trials but the rate
of executions dropped. Impunity prevailed
for grave human rights violations committed
in 2023 and previous years. Women and
girls, religious minorities and LGBTI
individuals were subjected to
discrimination, violence and prosecution for
exercising their human rights. Authorities
failed to address economic and social rights
affected by the worsening economic crisis,
and to protect workers from unfair
dismissals by private companies. Forced
evictions from informal settlements
continued, and tens of thousands of North
Sinai residents were barred from returning
to their homes. Refugees and asylum
seekers were arbitrarily detained for
irregularly entering or staying in Egypt, and
forced expulsions took place.

BACKGROUND
The “national dialogue” began in May, but
opposition politicians and human rights
defenders suspended their participation after
renewed arrests of government opponents.
The dialogue was suspended in September
ahead of presidential elections held in
December, amid a deepening financial and
economic crisis. The incumbent president,
Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, won the elections from
which genuine opposition candidates were
barred.
The president announced celebrations for
the “end of terrorism” in January, while
sporadic attacks in North Sinai continued. In
August, the Sinai Foundation for Human
Rights (SFHR), a rights group, reported the
use of child soldiers in military operations in
North Sinai. In a report to the UN Committee
on the Rights of the Child issued in March,
Egypt confirmed that 16 is the minimum age

155

for voluntary recruitment into the armed
forces.
From 9 October, Israel repeatedly attacked
the Rafah border crossing between Egypt and
Gaza and severely restricted entry of
humanitarian aid from Egypt into besieged
Gaza.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities continued to crush dissent
and stifle civil society. Among those targeted
were opposition politicians and their
supporters, relatives of dissidents abroad,
trade unionists, lawyers, and people critical of
the authorities’ human rights record and their
handling of the economic crisis and the
military’s role.
In January, after a grossly unfair trial, an
Emergency Supreme State Security Court
(ESSC) sentenced 82 people from Suez,
including 23 who were children at the time of
the alleged offences, to between five years’
and life imprisonment in connection to antigovernment protests in September 2019.1
Security forces arrested at least four
journalists for their work or opinions. They
included Hisham Kassem, a publisher and
president of the Free Current Movement, a
coalition of opposition liberal parties, who was
sentenced in September to six months’
imprisonment and a fine on charges of
“defamation” for his online criticism of a
former government minister’s alleged
corruption and of “insulting” public officials.2
At least 21 journalists remained in jail after
being convicted or pending investigations into
charges of “spreading false news”, belonging
to a “terrorist” group or “misuse of social
media”.
Over 600 news, human rights and other
websites continued to be blocked. The
authorities blocked the website of the NGO
Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies in
January, and the news sites of Soulta 4 and
Masr 360 in June, but unblocked opposition
news website Daarb in April.
Staff at Mada Masr, an independent media
platform, faced politically motivated
prosecutions and investigations, including in

156

relation to its publication in October of an
investigative report on the Rafah border
crossing.
Human rights defenders, trade unionists
and journalists were among 820 people
added to the government’s “list of terrorists”
throughout the year without due process,
depriving them of civic and political rights.
In April, the deadline for registration under
the draconian 2019 NGO Law came into
force, putting unregistered NGOs at risk of
closure.3
Arbitrary travel bans and/or asset freezes
remained in place against at least 20 human
rights defenders in connection to their work.
Security forces blocked people from
registering their endorsements for
prospective opposition candidates for
presidential elections and arbitrarily arrested
at least 137 supporters and relatives of
opposition politician and aspiring presidential
candidate Ahmed Altantawy. In September,
Citizen Lab confirmed that Ahmed
Altantawy’s phone was infected with Predator
spyware, assessing with “high confidence”
the government’s involvement.
In October, security forces in the cities of
Cairo and Alexandria arrested dozens of
people, including children, for protesting in
solidarity with Palestinians in Gaza. At least
67 remained in pretrial detention over protest
and terrorism-related charges at the end of
the year, according to the Egyptian
Commission for Rights and Freedoms.

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND UNFAIR
TRIALS
During the year, 834 prisoners held for
political reasons were released, while the
Supreme State Security Prosecution (SSSP)
interrogated at least 2,504 suspected critics
or opponents arrested in 2023 on
accusations of involvement in terrorismrelated crimes, cybercrimes, protests and
spreading “false news”.
Security forces refused to release 251
detainees who had been acquitted or
provisionally released by prosecutors or
judges, or had completed their prison
sentences.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

In June, President Sisi praised detentions
for “saving Egypt”.
SSSP prosecutors and judges routinely
renewed pretrial detention orders for
thousands of detainees without allowing them
to meaningfully challenge the legality of their
detention. Detention renewal hearings took
place via videoconference with detainees
connected from prison, denying them the
right to adequate defence and exposing them
to reprisals for reporting abuse in front of
prison guards.
Fair trial guarantees were systematically
flouted in political cases. In March, following
an unfair trial, an ESSC sentenced 30 people,
including the head of the Egyptian
Coordination for Rights and Freedoms, to
between five years’ and life imprisonment on
absurd charges stemming from their human
rights work or peaceful dissent.

ENFORCED
DISAPPEARANCES AND TORTURE AND
OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Security forces, including the National
Security Agency (NSA), continued to subject
dissidents to enforced disappearance.
According to the Stop Enforced
Disappearances campaign, at least 70
individuals arrested in 2023 were subjected
to enforced disappearance, with the fate and
whereabouts of six remaining unknown.
Torture and other ill-treatment remained
routine in prisons, police stations and NSArun facilities.
In January, security forces arrested lawyer
Shaaban Mohamed on a street in Giza and
subjected him to enforced disappearance in
an NSA facility for six weeks, during which he
was beaten, suspended and given electric
shocks.
Prisoners continued to be held in conditions
violating the absolute prohibition of torture
and other ill-treatment, including through
deliberate denial of healthcare, prolonged
solitary confinement, bombardment with
bright lights, camera surveillance around the
clock, and denial of family visits.4 Dozens of
prisoners held in the Badr prison complex in
Cairo governorate and the 10th of Ramadan

The State of the World’s Human Rights

prison in Sharqia governorate, to which
hundreds of political prisoners were
transferred from mid-2022 and mid-2023,
respectively, staged hunger strikes in protest
at detention conditions.

DEATH PENALTY
Criminal courts, including terrorism-circuits,
and military courts imposed death sentences
after unfair trials.
In January, a Cairo criminal court sentenced
people to death for terrorism-related offences
following a trial marred by allegations of
enforced disappearance and “confessions”
extracted under torture.
The number of executions carried out
declined from previous years.

IMPUNITY
Impunity prevailed for unlawful killings,
torture, enforced disappearance and other
grave human rights violations committed in
2023 and previous years. Ten years on, no
official had been held accountable for the
unlawful killings of at least 900 people during
violent dispersals of sit-ins by supporters of
the ousted president Mohamed Morsi on 14
August 2013.5
Authorities failed to investigate adequately
the causes and circumstances of at least 47
deaths in custody following reports of torture
or denial of healthcare. Security forces
threatened relatives seeking truth and justice
with arbitrary detention and other harm.
No officials were held accountable for the
death of Mahmoud Abdel Gawad in July in
Nabaroh police station, Dakahlia governorate,
four days after his arrest, amid credible
reports that police beat him severely and
gave him electric shocks.
No investigations were opened into the
death of lawyer Ali Abbas Barakat on 26
June, who had liver disease. He collapsed
and lost consciousness on 10 June in alQanater prison in Greater Cairo, but the
authorities waited 48 hours before
transferring him to a prison hospital.
In September, the Italian Constitutional
Court ruled that the trial in their absence of
four Egyptian officers accused of the torture

157

and murder of Italian student Giulio Regeni in
Egypt in 2016 can proceed in Italy.
Proceedings had stalled because Egypt
concealed the addresses of the suspects to
prevent serving them notices of their trial.

GENDER-BASED DISCRIMINATION AND
VIOLENCE
Women continued to face discrimination in
law and practice, including in matters of
marriage, divorce, child custody and political
office. Long-promised amendments to the
Personal Status Law stalled amid concerns
over lack of meaningful consultation with all
women human rights defenders.
The authorities failed to adequately prevent
gender-based violence by state and non-state
actors, amid a proliferation of reports in
Egyptian media of killings of women by family
members or rejected suitors.
Women were prosecuted for speaking out
against sexual violence or on “morality”
grounds.
In November, an appeals economic court
quashed a two-year prison sentence against
model and TikTok influencer Salma Elshimy
and fined her for “immoral” content “violating
Egyptian family values”. At least three women
influencers remained imprisoned on
“morality”-related or other bogus charges.
The authorities continued to harass and
prosecute individuals on the basis of their
actual or perceived sexual orientation or
gender identity. Several of them reported
beatings and other abuse in police custody.

ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL RIGHTS
Egypt’s severe economic crisis had
devastating effects on people’s access to
socio-economic rights.
The government allocated about half of the
2023/2024 budget to debt repayment and
failed to meet the constitutionally mandated
allocation of at least 3% and 6% of GDP to
health and to basic and higher education,
respectively.
After a deal reached with the International
Monetary Fund in late 2022 to float the
Egyptian pound, the currency lost significant
value. By February, annual inflation hovered

158

around 40%. Food prices rose by 68%
between August 2022 and July 2023,
according to the Central Agency for Public
Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS).
According to a senior CAPMAS employee, the
poverty rate rose significantly in 2022/2023,
increasing the urgency for the government to
adjust its social protection programmes.
The government failed to take adequate
steps to mitigate the impact of the economic
crisis on people’s rights, especially to an
adequate standard of living. In September,
the president announced an increase in the
monthly minimum wage for public sector
workers from 3,500 to 4,000 Egyptian
pounds (USD 114-130), which economic
rights experts considered incommensurate
with inflation, and the authorities failed to act
against private companies not paying the
minimum wage.
In September, the president said “hunger
and deprivation” were acceptable sacrifices
for development and progress.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
The authorities continued to impede and
intimidate striking workers seeking better pay
or working conditions.
In October, security forces prevented
striking workers from the Universal Group for
Home Appliances from gathering near the
company’s headquarters in 6 October city,
and warned them against complaining to the
Ministry of Manpower. The NSA also
summoned and questioned some of the
workers about the strike.
At least 14 teachers remained detained
pending investigations into terrorism-related
charges after they protested in October in the
New Administrative Capital in Cairo
governorate over their exclusion from
appointments. Candidates for civil servant
jobs complained about being denied
certificates of completion of the military
academy course, which became mandatory
for appointments in 2023, on security
grounds or for being pregnant or overweight.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

RIGHT TO HOUSING
Authorities continued to carry out forced
evictions and house demolitions, including in
Cairo’s informal settlements and the historic
“City of the Dead” cemetery, home to tens of
thousands of residents, and arrested
residents for protesting.
In March, an administrative court ruled
against residents of Waraq Island in Giza who
complained against a 2021 government
decision to appropriate their lands for “the
public good” without adequate
compensation. In February, security forces
dispersed a protest by scores of Waraq Island
residents using tear gas and carried out
arrests.
House demolitions and forced evictions took
place in Al-Arish city in North Sinai,
according to SFHR.
In October, the army unlawfully fired live
ammunition to disperse hundreds of peaceful
protesters who staged a sit-in in Sheikh
Zuwayed city in North Sinai demanding to be
allowed to return to their homes in Sheikh
Zuwayed and Rafah city, also in North Sinai,
from where they had been forcibly displaced
since 2014 due to military operations against
armed groups, including Wilayat Sinai, an
affiliate of the Islamic State armed group.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Authorities continued to discriminate against
Christians in law and practice.
No one was held accountable for sectarian
attacks in January against Christians in the
village of Ashruba in Minya governorate,
which led to injuries and property damage.
The right to build or repair churches
remained restricted by a 2016 law requiring
approval from security agencies and other
state bodies. In May, the prime minister
announced that since the law came into
force, the government had approved the
legalization of 2,815 churches, approximately
half of the submitted requests.
In a positive development, in March, a
family court in Cairo applied Christian
Orthodox by-laws in an inheritance case
brought by Huda Nassralla, a lawyer at the
Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights, a

The State of the World’s Human Rights

rights group. Generally, judges apply the
Personal Status Law for Muslims, which
discriminates against women in matters of
inheritance.
Members of religious minorities, atheists
and others not espousing state-sanctioned
religious beliefs were summoned and
questioned by the NSA or otherwise
threatened or harassed, including by their
educational institutions and online.
A Yemeni Christian convert from Islam,
Abdul-Baqi Saeed Abdo, continued to be
detained pending investigations by the SSSP
on charges of “defamation of Islamic religion”
and belonging to a “terrorist group” for social
media posts about his beliefs.6

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
From April, some 370,000 Sudanese
nationals fled to Egypt, according to UNHCR,
the UN refugee agency. The authorities
tightened entry restrictions, requiring all
Sudanese nationals to obtain visas from
consulates and security clearance for boys
and men aged between 16 and 50. Some
Sudanese, Eritrean and Syrian nationals were
barred from entry at land borders and at least
one asylum seeker was forcibly returned to
Sudan for not having valid residency.
Security forces arrested dozens of refugees
and asylum seekers from Afghanistan, Syria
and sub-Saharan African countries as well as
Uyghurs from China for irregularly entering or
staying in Egypt. In May, Alfred Djasnan, a
Chadian refugee, journalist and president of
the African Refugees Rights Initiative, was
deported to Rwanda. He had been arrested
after sub-Saharan Africans protested against
their living conditions in front of the UNHCR
office in 6 October city.
1. “Egypt: Quash convictions in torture-tainted grossly unfair mass trial
of 2019 protesters”, 23 February
2. “Egypt: Immediately release prominent dissident on trial for online
expression”, 14 September
3. “Egypt: Independent civil society organizations at risk of closure after
NGO deadline passes”, 12 April
4. “Egypt: Tortured son of opposition figure held incommunicado: Anas
al-Beltagy”, 29 March

159

5. “Egypt: ‘Decade of shame’ since hundreds killed with impunity in
Rabaa massacre”, 14 August
6. “Egypt: Unjustly held Yemeni at risk of deportation: Abdul-Baqi Saeed
Abdo”, 7 September

EL SALVADOR
Republic of El Salvador
The state of emergency initiated in 2022
was ongoing, resulting in widespread
human rights violations, erosion of the rule
of law, and criminalization of dissenting
voices. Restrictions on freedom of
association increased, and obstacles to
peaceful protest and stigmatization of
journalists and human rights defenders
continued. The total prohibition of abortion
remained in force. Authorities failed to
approve legislation guaranteeing the rights
of victims of crimes committed during the
1980-1992 armed conflict.

BACKGROUND
Following a proposal by President Bukele, the
Legislative Assembly extended the state of
emergency, which remained in place at the
end of 2023. The assembly enacted and
amended numerous laws that violated the
right to a fair trial. International human rights
mechanisms expressed their concerns that
the extension did not conform with the
exceptional and temporary nature required
for the invocation of a state of emergency.
In October, President Bukele officially
registered himself as a presidential
candidate, despite objections from legal
experts and civil society organizations citing
the constitution’s prohibition of immediate reelection.

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND UNFAIR
TRIALS
Between the start of the state of emergency
on 27 March 2022 and the end of 2023,
more than 73,000 detentions were recorded.
Most detainees were accused of “illegal
associations”, a crime linked to gang activity
and membership. The majority of the

160

detentions carried out under the state of
emergency were arbitrary because they
violated due process guarantees through
absence of clear judicial orders, prolongation
of administrative detentions, lack of precise
information from authorities to detainees’
families regarding their whereabouts, and
concealment of the identity of the judges
processing detainees. The state of
emergency particularly affected impoverished
and marginalized communities, deepening
their vulnerability.1
National protection mechanisms, such as
the Human Rights Ombudsperson’s Office,
recorded a significant increase in requests for
the verification of detainees’ whereabouts.
Under the state of emergency, however, its
capacity to fulfil its mandate was limited and
it was unable to access all detention centres.
The Supreme Court of Justice was also
denounced by civil society organizations for
its ineffectiveness in processing habeas
corpus appeals, increasing detainees’
vulnerability.
Although authorities reported the release of
more than 7,000 detainees, 85% of these
individuals were not acquitted of the “illegal
associations” charges and continued to face
legal proceedings that remained pending.
The risk of these individuals undergoing
unfair trials was exacerbated by regulations
that allowed summary trials and hindered the
right to effective defence.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The Salvadoran penitentiary system faced
critical levels of overcrowding, reaching a
300% occupancy rate, equivalent to more
than 100,000 inmates. This accounted for
1.14% of the country’s general population
and positioned El Salvador as having the
highest rate of incarceration globally,
according to local civil society organizations.
Many detainees reported being subjected to
torture and other ill-treatment, including
restrictions on food, water and access to
sanitary facilities, lack of adequate medical
care, and excessive use of force by prison
guards. Women inmates lacked attention to
their specific needs, including access to

The State of the World’s Human Rights

reproductive health services and protection
against gender-based violence. Since the
start of the state of emergency, at least 190
deaths caused by torture and lack of medical
care had occurred in state custody.2
Several entities, such as the Attorney
General’s Office and the Human Rights
Ombudsman’s Office, did not effectively and
diligently investigate these cases. The
Attorney General’s Office ordered the majority
of investigations to be archived. The InterAmerican Commission on Human Rights
requested access to perform an independent
assessment of prison conditions, but
the authorities refused.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
El Salvador saw an increase in protests in
2023, as the situation in the country
deteriorated under the extended state of
emergency. Protesters denounced human
rights violations under the state of
emergency; demanded respect for economic,
social, and cultural rights; and defended land
and territory. The authorities’ obstructive
response to these legitimate expressions of
social discontent violated people’s right to
freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly. The authorities’ actions included
stigmatization and questioning the legitimacy
of protesters by high-ranking state officials
through social media and public statements;
intimidation and threats towards, and
excessive surveillance of, organizers and
protesters; restrictions on movement by
blockading roads and access points to
specific areas to prevent participation in
these activities; and the arbitrary detention
and criminalization of protesters.
The government undermined the autonomy
and effectiveness of labour unions. The
Movement of Dismissed Workers recorded
the disbandment of 10 unions in 2023 due to
the elimination of an equivalent number of
government departments. Additionally, the
government imposed unwarranted
restrictions on union registration processes
and the accreditation of union boards.
Authorities also disregarded

The State of the World’s Human Rights

trade union immunity, failed to comply with
collective bargaining agreements, and
engaged in actions that jeopardized the job
security of public sector employees.
According to local organizations, in 2023 at
least 16 trade unionists were arrested and
charged with offences such as public
disorder and resisting arrest during peaceful
protests. Under the framework of the state of
emergency, at least three trade unionists
were arbitrarily arrested, having been falsely
accused of the crime of “illegal associations”.
According to a 2022 investigation, 35
journalists and activists in El Salvador were
subjected to Pegasus software-enabled
espionage between 2020 and 2021. Despite
appeals by the Association of Journalists of El
Salvador (APES) to the General Attorney’s
Office to investigate these incidents and the
reports of hacking of WhatsApp accounts, no
findings had been released 21 months later,
according to APES. The absence of a
specialized team and the lack of a prompt,
effective, impartial, and independent
investigation have fostered widespread
impunity and eroded independent
journalism’s trust in the authorities.
APES submitted a report about the impact
of the state of emergency on press freedom.
According to their records, between March
2022 and July 2023, there were 222
violations of freedom of expression and 385
cases of harassment against journalists and
media outlets, most commonly digital attacks
and stigmatizing statements. APES reported
six instances of journalists being compelled
to flee the country in the first half of 2023
due to escalating threats, intimidation,
assaults, and the looming threat of
criminalization. In April, El Faro, a digital
media outlet, moved its administrative
operations to Costa Rica because of the
hostile climate towards journalism in El
Salvador.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The authorities continued to stigmatize and
harass human rights defenders through
social media. This involved posting
threatening content, such as statements by

161

state officials that incited harassment and
attacks on the reputation of individuals and
organizations, and the spread of
misinformation through digital platforms to
discredit and intimidate critical and dissident
voices. This campaign of harassment
affected the integrity, security, and personal
well-being of human rights defenders and
journalists, and limited their freedom of
expression and association.
The state of emergency was used to
criminalize human rights defenders by
misusing anti-gang laws to justify their
arbitrary detention. Most of these cases
involved people defending land, territory and
natural resources, and labour rights.
International human rights mechanisms
criticized the state for its lack of clarity and
investigation concerning these detentions, as
well as the absence of due process
guarantees.

RIGHT TO INFORMATION
There was a lack of transparency and severe
restrictions on access to public information,
and El Salvador was excluded from the Open
Government Partnership. The government
hindered access to essential data by
imposing systematic restrictions on
information and excessive requirements for
providing data. Government departments
such as the Bureau of Prisons and the
Ministry of National Defence failed to meet
international standards on requirements to
restrict access to security information. The
Legislative Assembly expedited legislative
processes, restricting public participation in
discussions around new laws, which limited
transparency.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
The total ban on abortion, which led to
women facing imprisonment for charges
relating to obstetric emergencies, remained
in force, violating sexual and reproductive
rights. Due to the ban, at the end of 2023 at
least 21 women were facing legal
proceedings on charges relating to obstetric
emergencies.

162

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Authorities continued to fail to adopt
adequate legislation to guarantee the rights of
the victims of crimes under international law
committed during the civil war between 1980
and 1992. There was little progress in the
investigation and prosecution of individuals
suspected of criminal responsibility for
crimes committed during the armed conflict.
1. “El Salvador: One year into state of emergency, authorities are
systematically committing human rights violations”, 3 April
2. “El Salvador: Policies, practices, and abusive, arbitrary legislation
violate human rights and threaten civic space”, 5 December

EQUATORIAL
GUINEA
Republic of Equatorial Guinea
The right to freedom of expression
continued to be restricted. The year was
marked by a military trial of opposition
activists, arbitrary detentions and several
allegations of torture and other illtreatment, including at least one allegation
that torture led to death in custody. LGBTI
people continued to be persecuted.

BACKGROUND
On 31 January, Manuela Roka Botey was
appointed by the president to serve as
Equatorial Guinea’s first woman prime
minister. President Teodoro Obiang Nguema
Mbasogo had been re-elected for a sixth term
in office in November 2022 with 95% of the
votes, according to the national electoral
commission.
According to the World Bank, food prices
and the rate of food insecurity, particularly
among the rural population, remained high.
Due to the country’s over-reliance on imports
for food consumption (80%), food price
increases were fuelled by supply chain
disruption arising from the war in Ukraine
and the aftermath of the Covid-19 pandemic.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

An outbreak of Marburg virus killed at least
12 people.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Equatorial Guinea was ranked 120th out of
180 countries surveyed by Reporters Without
Borders in its 2023 World Press Freedom
Index. The government maintained a close
watch over the media and censorship
remained the norm. There were no
independent media outlets. The legal
landscape criminalizing the exercise of the
right to freedom of expression and media
freedom through the frequent use of slander
and defamation laws continued to encourage
self-censorship.

UNFAIR TRIALS
In June, Gabriel Nsé Obiang Obono, leader of
the banned opposition party Citizens for
Innovation (CI), was sentenced by a military
tribunal to 29 years’ imprisonment for
“homicide, abusive use of fundamental
rights, insults to security forces” and “illegal
possession of ammunitions”. He had been
arrested in September 2022 after police laid
siege to the party’s office in the capital,
Malabo. Dozens of CI supporters, arrested
alongside him, were convicted of the same
charges, receiving sentences of between nine
and 29 years in prison.
Human rights activist Anacleto Micha
Ndong Nlang initially faced the same charges
over the same event, even though he was
arrested four days before the others (when he
visited the office to see whether party
supporters under siege needed assistance).
His charges were subsequently changed to
“contempt against authority” and his case
sent to ordinary court. On 19 May, he was
sentenced to six months in prison and fined
XAF 100,000 (around EUR 152). He was
released on 23 June, some nine months after
his arrest.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In January, the Spain-based opposition group
Movement for the Liberation of the Third
Equatorial Guinea (MLGE3R) announced the
death in detention of one of its leading

The State of the World’s Human Rights

activists, Julio Obama Mefuman, a dual
Spanish and Equatorial Guinean citizen, and
accused the authorities of torturing him
multiple times. He had been serving a 60year prison sentence in Oveng Azem prison
on charges of participating in an alleged
attempted coup. Foreign minister Simeón
Oyono Esono Angué confirmed that Julio
Obama had died in a Mongomo hospital
following illness but refuted the accusations
of torture.
The death of Julio Obama occurred less
than two weeks after Spain’s High Court
opened an investigation against Carmelo
Ovono Obiang, the son of the Equatorial
Guinean president, and two other officials.
They were accused of the alleged abduction
and torture of four Equatorial Guinean
nationals, including Julio Obama and another
dual national as well as two other residents of
Spain, all of whom were MLGE3R members.
On 16 February, the European Parliament
adopted a resolution condemning “political
persecution and repression of political
opponents” in Equatorial Guinea, as well as
the death of Julio Obama while in custody,
and requesting an independent international
investigation. In March, all three officials
failed to appear at the Spanish High Court.
The court ordered that Julio Obama’s body
be taken back to Spain, but this was ignored.
In April, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Equatorial Guinea informed the Spanish
government that it had opened an
investigation into the alleged torture of the
four men, thereby claiming jurisdiction over
the matter. Court proceedings in Spain were
still pending at the end of the year.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Young men remained in arbitrary detention
after the government’s “Cleaning Operation”
against youth gang crime. In February, Pablo
Santiago Nsue Ondo Angue, a 22-year-old
man who was arrested under this scheme,
died in Oveng Azem prison of
cardiorespiratory arrest. He had remained in
detention despite a court order granting him
release in October 2022.

163

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In May, the organization for LGBTI rights, We
are Part of the World, published a report
denouncing alleged torture of 12 LGBTI
people by the authorities. On 10 July, the
Malabo office of the organization was
allegedly searched by security forces with no
warrant.

ERITREA
State of Eritrea
Eritrea’s human rights situation showed no
sign of improvement. The authorities
continued to subject political dissidents,
members of religious congregations,
journalists and Indigenous People to
arbitrary detention and enforced
disappearance. The right to practice
religious beliefs was severely restricted, and
a religious leader died in prison after being
detained for 10 years. The Afar Indigenous
People faced discrimination and other
persecution. The use of indefinite
mandatory military service intensified;
women conscripts faced sexual violence in
training camps.

BACKGROUND
Eritrean Defence Forces continued to carry
out systematic and widespread sexual
violence, including rape and gang rape,
against women in neighbouring Ethiopia’s
Tigray region, months after the Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement was signed in
November 2022 (see Ethiopia entry). The
government failed to initiate any investigation
into these, and other crimes under
international law committed in Tigray. The
president denied well-founded allegations of
the Eritrean army’s conduct as “fantasy”.
Eritrea continued to refuse to cooperate with
international mechanisms, including the UN
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in Eritrea.
The ban imposed on independent media in
2001 remained in place.

164

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND ENFORCED
DISAPPEARANCES
The government continued its 22-year-long
policy of arbitrarily detaining and, in some
cases, carrying out the enforced
disappearance of journalists, real or
perceived political dissidents and members
of religious congregations (see below,
Freedom of religion and belief) as a tool of
repression. Detainees’ rights to judicial review
and access to legal counsel were denied. The
fate and whereabouts of 11 members of the
G-15, a group of 15 senior politicians who
spoke publicly against the president in 2001,
remained unknown, along with that of 16
journalists accused of being linked to the
G-15.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
The authorities discriminated against people
on the basis of their faith, denying those
belonging to unregistered religions the right
to practice their beliefs. Hundreds of people
remained in prolonged arbitrary detention
and some were subjected to enforced
disappearance for belonging to unrecognized
religious groups.
The Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church,
Sunni Islam, the Catholic Church and the
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Eritrea were
the only registered religions, while the Baha’i
faith was recognized de facto.
On 9 April, Pastor Tesfaye Seyoum, the
founder and leader of Meserete Kirstos
Church, died in Mai Serwa prison, where he
had been held for 10 years for belonging to a
banned religion. The authorities did not
permit his family to bury him for 10 days, and
then compelled them to do so in the capital,
Asmara, not his home town.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
The Afar Indigenous People continued to
experience multiple government attempts to
interfere with their customary way of life,
including by banning them from fishing, their
primary livelihood. According to the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in Eritrea, they were “subjected to
discrimination, harassment, arbitrary arrests,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

disappearance, violence and widespread
persecution”; and as of May, at least 57,000
of them were registered as refugees in
Ethiopia, having fled their homes.

FORCED LABOUR
The use of mandatory indefinite national
military service persisted, as well as the
forced labour attached to it, sometimes
amounting to slavery.
In his report to the UN Human Rights
Council in June/July, the Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in Eritrea
said he had received information about
“heavy round-ups” of conscripts in August
2022. Up to November 2022, the army used
“coercive practices to force individuals to
participate in military action in Ethiopia”, and
families were forced to hand over their
relatives, including children.
Reports of torture and other ill-treatment
and sexual violence continued in conscript
camps. The Special Rapporteur reported that
former women recruits of the Sawa military
training camp said that camp officials carried
out rape and other forms of gender-based
violence against female conscripts.
Many young people were forced to spend
their final secondary school year at the Sawa
military training camp, making it difficult for
them to complete their education.

ESWATINI
Kingdom of Eswatini
The authorities enjoyed impunity for attacks
on human rights defenders and activists,
and failed to investigate the unlawful killing
of Thulani Maseko. Rights to freedom of
expression, association and peaceful
assembly were routinely violated.
Opposition activists and dissenters faced
unfair trials and harsh punishment. The
right to health was restricted. Hundreds
faced forced eviction. The government
refused to allow an LGBTI rights group to
register despite a supreme court ruling.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

BACKGROUND
Parliamentary elections were held in August
and September. A 1973 decree banning
political parties remained in place, under
which only independent candidates can run
for election. King Mswati III held ultimate
authority over all branches of government.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
In January, human rights lawyer and activist
Thulani Maseko was assassinated in his
home. Despite condemnation and calls from
the international community to conduct a
transparent, independent and impartial
investigation, the government has made no
progress towards ensuring accountability for
the killing. Thulani Maseko was killed weeks
after attacks were carried out on human
rights lawyer Maxwell Nkambule, and Penuel
Malinga and Xolile Dlamini-Malinga, both
members of the banned opposition party,
People’s United Democratic Movement
(PUDEMO). The authorities failed to
investigate these, and other unlawful attacks
and killings carried out since the government
launched a brutal crackdown in response to
pro-democracy and anti-police brutality
protests in 2021. They also failed to bring to
justice suspected perpetrators and ensure
access to justice and effective remedies for
victims.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities continued the persecution of
members of the Swaziland Transport,
Communication and Allied Workers Union
(SWATCAWU) for organizing national strikes
in 2022 to demand improved working
conditions and political reform. Trumped-up
charges of contempt of court were brought
against SWATCAWU and two other labour
unions; and in January the Royal Eswatini
Police Service issued an arrest warrant for
SWATCAWU’s general secretary, Sticks
Nkambule. Routine threats, intimidation and
harassment by security forces led him to flee
into hiding.
On 25 January, police violently repressed
student protesters in the city of Manzini, and

165

arbitrarily detained student leaders. Two days
later, two activists were injured when police
used live ammunition against protesters who
were delivering a petition to the Manzini
police headquarters.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Arbitrary detention remained part of the state
strategy of repression. On 1 June, former
MPs Mthandeni Dube and Mduduzi Bacede
Mabuza were found guilty of terrorism,
sedition and murder under the 2008
Suppression of Terrorism Act. They were
arrested for publicly calling for political
reform during the 2021 protests and face up
to 20 years in prison. While in detention
during 2022, they were beaten by
correctional services officers, and denied
access to their lawyers and medical
treatment.
The security forces arbitrarily detained and
tortured political and labour activists,
including Brian Sihlongonyane, a PUDEMO
member, who was abducted, tortured and
dumped in a forest by members of the
Umbutfo Eswatini Defence Force after he led
the peaceful delivery of a petition to the UN
on 12 April.
In separate incidents in June and July,
police detained and beat members of the
Communist Party of Swaziland (CPS) before
releasing them without charge. The CPS
members also reported that they were
subjected to torture and other ill-treatment in
police custody. No investigations were carried
out by the authorities into the allegations
made against the security forces.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Public healthcare remained systemically
under-resourced, resulting in nationwide
demonstrations in June and July. Health
personnel and patients protested against the
government’s failure to supply drugs, medical
supplies, equipment, transport and fuel in
public clinics and hospitals. The health
minister acknowledged the crisis, and later
announced that a sub-committee tasked by
the cabinet had introduced strategies for the

166

sustainable financing and delivery of
healthcare.

FORCED EVICTIONS
Hundreds remained at risk of forced evictions
as the government failed to reform the
country’s land governance system, which
limits the right to security of tenure.
Communities in Sigombeni and the Malkerns
continued their legal challenges to evictions.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Consensual same-sex sexual conduct
remained a criminal offence, and
discrimination against LGBTI people and
organizations was widespread. In July, the
Supreme Court ruled that the Registrar of
Companies’ refusal to register the Eswatini
Sexual and Gender Minorities (ESGM) as a
non-profit organization was unconstitutional.
The acting minister of commerce and trade
rejected the ruling citing “Roman-Dutch
Law”, and directed the registrar to refuse
ESGM’s application.

ETHIOPIA
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
After the signing of an agreement to end
hostilities, evidence of aid supplies being
diverted led humanitarian agencies to
temporarily suspend food aid to the Tigray
region. Fresh clashes between the federal
army and Amhara Fano militias erupted in
the Amhara region, and human rights
violations, including arbitrary arrests and
detentions, were committed in this context;
extrajudicial executions were carried out in
the Tigray region. Women in Tigray were
subjected to sexual violence. Influential
groups and individuals led a campaign that
culminated in a government crackdown
against LGBTI people. The internet was
shut down in the Amhara region. Access to
social media platforms was restricted across
Ethiopia, and around 30 protesters were
killed. The government successfully
campaigned against regional and

The State of the World’s Human Rights

international investigative mechanisms that
could have led to justice and accountability
for victims and survivors of crimes under
international law.

BACKGROUND
The population forcibly displaced as part of
the ethnic cleansing campaign against the
Tigrayan community in the Western Tigray
Zone were yet to return to their homes. New
waves of people displaced from the zone,
which is under the administration of Amhara
regional civilian and security forces,
continued arriving in other parts of the Tigray
region. Local media reported that 47,000
people fled in March, while in September
over 1,000 people, including those from
mass detention centres, fled from the zone.
Fighting escalated in the Oromia region,
after peace talks between the Oromo
Liberation Army and the government failed
for the second time, affecting civilians in the
region.

RIGHT TO FOOD
In May, some six months after the Cessation
of Hostilities Agreement (CoHA) was signed
in November 2022, the World Food
Programme (WFP) and the US Agency for
International Development (USAID)
announced the temporary suspension of food
aid to the Tigray region. The measure was
taken after agencies found evidence of
supplies being diverted, allegedly by
government agencies and the military.
Despite announcements in November and
December from USAID and the WFP of their
intention to resume food distribution, reports
from the region indicated that they were yet
to resume distribution in full. The suspension
affected more than 4 million people who were
already food insecure. Reports from local
health professionals and government
authorities indicated that, following the
suspension, hundreds of people had died
from hunger in the region.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
The government imposed a six-month
nationwide state of emergency on 4 August,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

following widespread armed clashes between
the Ethiopian National Defence Force (ENDF)
and the Fano militia in the Amhara region.
The emergency law granted sweeping powers
to the security forces, resulting in hundreds
of people being detained and denied access
to lawyers and courts. While there was
evidence of further gross human rights
violations emerging during the clashes, the
worsening situation prevented effective
communication with people in the region,
making it difficult to determine the extent of
the violations (see below, Freedom of
expression and assembly).

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
Eritrean Defence Force (EDF) soldiers
continued to carry out extrajudicial
executions against civilians in the Tigray
region for months after the CoHA was signed.
They executed at least 24 civilians between
November 2022 and January 2023 in the
Kokob Tsibah district. In 2023, Amnesty
International verified the extrajudicial
executions of at least 20 civilians between 25
October and 1 November 2022 in Mariam
Shewito district. However, social workers in
the district had a list of more than 100
civilians executed in the same period by the
EDF.1

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
The EDF perpetrated acts of sexual violence
against women between November 2022 and
late January 2023 in the Kokob Tsibah
district in the Tigray region. During this
period, EDF soldiers held at least 15 women
captive for nearly three months, until 19
January 2023, at their military camp. The
women were repeatedly raped by soldiers, in
a situation that amounted to sexual slavery. In
addition, they endured other physical and
psychological abuse, and deprivation of
essential resources like food, water and
medical services.
The EDF also subjected women held captive
in their homes in the same district to gangrape and rape. Survivors, social workers and
local officials said the EDF targeted these
women based on suspicions that their

167

husbands, sons or other male relatives were
associated with the Tigrayan forces.
Local civil society organizations and media
reported multiple cases of abduction for
forced marriage. The abduction of Tsega
Belachew, an accountant in a bank, was
among those cases that received national
attention, including on social media. She was
abducted on 23 May by a bodyguard of the
mayor of Hawassa in the Sidama region and
held for nine days before being released.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
An on- and offline campaign against LGBTI
people was launched by social media
influencers, religious leaders and popular
artists. It culminated in early August with the
authorities in the capital, Addis Ababa,
raiding hotels, bars and entertainment
centres they alleged were allowing “gay
sexual activities” to take place. LGBTI people
in Addis Ababa reported beatings after social
media posts identifying them were circulated.
LGBTI rights defenders accused social
media platforms, particularly TikTok, of failing
to act against content that incited violence
against people based on their sexuality or
gender identity.
Consensual same-sex sexual relations
continued to be criminalized and to carry a
prison sentence of up to 10 years.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
The communication blackout, imposed by
the federal authorities in the Western Tigray
Zone, persisted for a third year. On 3 August,
as a result of the clashes in the Amhara
region, the authorities suspended internet
access there, while some parts of the region
faced a complete communication blackout.
This continued to the end of the year.
On 9 February, following tensions caused by
a disagreement within Ethiopia’s orthodox
church, at least 30 protesters were killed by
security forces in the city of Shashamane in
the Oromia region, according to the Ethiopian
Orthodox Tewahedo Church. At the same
time, the authorities banned members of
church factions involved in the disagreement

168

from holding rallies and restricted access to
social media until 17 July.

IMPUNITY
The government continued to fail to
investigate and prosecute alleged
perpetrators of crimes under international law
in open proceedings. Following a campaign
by the Ethiopian government against justice
and accountability efforts, the African
Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights
terminated the mandate of the Commission
of Inquiry into the situation in the Tigray
Region in May. The Commission of Inquiry
never published a report on its findings or
communicated the fate of the evidence it
gathered to victims, survivors or the public.
The government tried to garner support to
prematurely terminate the mandate of the
UN International Commission of Human
Rights Experts on Ethiopia (ICHREE) in
March. In September, however, the ICHREE
published its report which concluded, among
other things, that “the current situation
across [Ethiopia]… continues to bear
hallmarked risks of future atrocity crimes”.
Despite the report’s findings, member states
at the UN Human Rights Council failed to
table a resolution to renew the ICHREE’s
mandate.
Meanwhile, the government held
consultations on a policy proposal for
transitional justice, a process that focuses on
reconciliation rather than justice and
accountability for the victims and survivors.
1. Ethiopia: “Today or Tomorrow, They Should Be Brought Before
Justice”: Rape, Sexual Slavery, Extrajudicial Executions, and Pillage
by Eritrean Defence Forces, 4 September

FIJI
Republic of Fiji
A law restricting the media was repealed
but other legislation limiting the rights to
freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly remained. Women were underrepresented in public office although legal

The State of the World’s Human Rights

obstacles to voting for married women were
removed. Migrant workers remained
vulnerable to exploitation.

BACKGROUND
The new government – elected in December
2022 in the first change of government since
the 2006 coup – entered its first year in
office.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
In April, parliament repealed the Media
Industry Development Act (2010), under
which journalists and media outlets faced
fines or imprisonment for publishing
information “against the national interest”.
However, the Public Order Act, sedition
provisions of the Crimes Act and other
restrictive laws remained in place.
Police took a restrictive approach to policing
protests, but the government showed
increased respect for the right to peaceful
assembly. On 25 August, police prevented
members of the Fiji First political party from
joining a peaceful protest against the release
by Japan of Fukushima nuclear wastewater
into the Pacific Ocean. In March, police
attempted to block a “Reclaim the Night”
march in support of ending violence against
women. The march took place following
ministerial intervention.
In July, the High Court dismissed on appeal
the conviction of lawyer Richard Naidu who
was found guilty in 2022 of contempt of court
for publicly highlighting a spelling error in a
court judgment.
In February, the opposition leader, former
prime minister Frank Bainimarama, resigned
from parliament after being suspended for
criticizing the newly elected prime minister
and president. In October, Frank
Bainimarama and former police
commissioner Sitiveni Qiliho were acquitted
of charges of perverting the course of justice
and abuse of power respectively for allegedly
interfering in police investigations into
complaints in 2020 about financial
mismanagement at the University of the
South Pacific.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

DISCRIMINATION
In May, parliament repealed an amendment
to the Electoral Act removing the requirement
that women who wished to vote under their
married name must first apply for their name
to be changed on their birth certificate.
Despite commitments by the new
government to increase the representation of
women in public office, the Fiji Women’s
Rights Movement (FWRM) found that
women’s representation on State boards and
commissions was unchanged from 2020 at
20%. Women held just 10% of parliamentary
seats in 2023.
The Fiji Women’s Crisis Centre (FWCC)
recorded increased reports of rape to their
organization compared to 2022.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In a case brought by representatives of
Indigenous People from Malolo island, the
High Court found in April that the Chinalinked company Freesoul Real Estate
Development was liable for civil damages for
the illegal destruction of reefs and mangroves
for which the company was fined in 2022.

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In September, authorities revoked the visas of
seven South Korean nationals with leadership
positions in the Grace Road company where
allegations of mistreatment of migrant
workers had been reported since 2018. The
group, which operates a church and owns
restaurants and other businesses in Fiji,
employs around 400 workers from South
Korea. According to media reports, the
migrant workers were subjected to abuse and
exploitation including non-payment of wages,
the withholding of passports and physical
assaults. Two of the seven were deported.

FINLAND
Republic of Finland
Public healthcare services were
inadequately resourced. A new law made
abortion available on request up to 12

169

weeks of pregnancy. The government
introduced cuts to social security. There
were inconsistencies in the policing of
protests. Measures to phase out fossil fuels
remained inadequate. Legal gender
recognition became available to transgender
adults but not children and adolescents.
The government announced plans to tighten
immigration policies.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Inadequate provision in public primary
healthcare meant that people reliant on it
faced barriers to accessing services, while
those with access to occupational and private
healthcare systems did not face similar
obstacles.1
In June, the government announced plans
to seek significant savings from public
healthcare funding. The government also
announced that it would raise healthcare
user fees and tax on medicines.2
The government proposed removing the
right to necessary healthcare from people
residing in Finland without legal status.
In September, a law entered into force
allowing abortion upon request in the first 12
weeks of pregnancy.

RIGHT TO SOCIAL SECURITY
In December, the parliament adopted
significant and widespread cuts to social
security. According to legislative proposals,
the government expected an increased risk of
eviction and food insecurity as a result. The
cuts were predicted to affect many already
at-risk groups, including women, migrants,
people with disabilities and families with
children.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Police dispersed a number of protests that
were disrupting traffic. There were regional
inconsistencies in the policing of protests.
Police failed to protect protesters, including
from aggressive driving, in Kuusankoski and
Jyväskylä in May and August, respectively.
In February, police unlawfully prohibited
filming during a protest in Aalistunturi and in
front of the Turkish embassy in Helsinki,

170

where a photojournalist was detained and his
camera memory card confiscated. In August,
at least one protester was arbitrarily detained
in Jyväskylä.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Measures to equitably phase out fossil fuels
and to conserve and enhance forests and
other carbon sinks remained inadequate to
achieve the government’s aim of carbon
neutrality by 2035. Biodiversity continued to
decline because of intensive forestry and
other land use. Finland increased climate
finance to developing countries.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In April, a law came into force making legal
gender recognition available to transgender
adults upon written application. No system
was introduced for children and
adolescents.3 In November, civil society
groups criticized the government for the lack
of specific measures to advance LGBTI
rights; discrimination against trans and
intersex people remained widespread.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The 2023 government programme confirmed
extensive support to Ukrainian refugees. At
the same time, it introduced plans to tighten
immigration and asylum policies, including
for people seeking protection from other parts
of the world. These included making
international protection temporary, preventing
asylum seekers from applying for work-based
residence permits, increasing the use of
immigration detention, and tightening
requirements for family reunification,
permanent residency and citizenship.
Problems with submitting asylum claims
were reported, particularly by people who
had obtained residence permits on other
grounds.
Claiming to act in response to an alleged
attempt by Russia to “instrumentalize”
migration movements, in November the
government gradually closed all crossing
points at the Russian border and they
remained closed at the end of the year.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In December, the government introduced a
bill to reform the Act on the Sámi Parliament
to enhance the protection of the rights of
Sámi people. The proposal was the fourth
attempt to reform the law, following failures
during three previous government terms.
1. “Finland: ‘I know I won’t get help’: Inequality of healthcare in
Finland”, 13 June
2. “Finland: Submission to the UN Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights 74th Session, 25 September – 13 October 2023,
Follow-up”, 23 August
3. “Finland: New gender recognition law ‘a major step towards
protecting trans rights’”, 1 February

FRANCE
French Republic
Systemic racism and religious
discrimination persisted, including against
Muslim women and girls. Racial profiling
continued with impunity. Excessive
restrictions on protests and excessive use of
force by police continued. Mass protests
and unrest followed the killing of a 17-yearold boy of Algerian descent by police at a
traffic stop. Racist, xenophobic and antiLGBTI vandalism and violent attacks were
frequently reported.
Parliament passed highly controversial new
laws authorizing the use of mass video
surveillance technology by law enforcement
and introducing discriminatory immigration,
nationality and asylum restrictions.

DISCRIMINATION
In January, the government launched its fouryear National Plan Combating Racism,
Antisemitism and Discrimination Linked to
Origin, which failed to acknowledge or tackle
institutional and systemic racism.
In June, OHCHR, the UN human rights
office, urged the government to “seriously
address the deep issues of racism and
discrimination in law enforcement”. The
CERD Committee called on France to tackle
“the structural and systemic causes of racial

The State of the World’s Human Rights

discrimination, including in law enforcement,
in particular in the police”.
In October, France’s highest administrative
authority, the Council of State (Conseil
d’État), acknowledged the practice of
discriminatory police checks against Black
and Arab men and boys but proposed no
action.
Throughout the year, mosques, synagogues
and cemeteries were subjected to racist
attacks, often being vandalized with racist
symbols and messaging promoting extremist
political groups. After the escalation of
violence in Israel and occupied Gaza, reports
of attacks increased as schools and walls
were defaced with Nazi and antisemitic
symbols.
The CEDAW Committee expressed concern
about persistent discriminatory stereotypes
and high unemployment rates among
undocumented migrant women, women
belonging to ethnic or religious minorities,
women with disabilities and older women.
MUSLIM WOMEN AND GIRLS
Ignoring the recommendation of the Public
Rapporteur, the Council of State ruled that
the French Football Federation could
maintain a discriminatory policy effectively
prohibiting Muslim women and girl players
who wore religious headgear from competing.
In October, 69 teams called for the repeal of
the French Federation for Basketball’s
discriminatory ban on the participation of
women and girls wearing religious headgear.
In September, the minister for sports said in
an interview that women wearing religious
headgear could not represent France at the
2024 Paris Olympics. OHCHR criticized this
decision, stating: “No one should impose on
a woman what she needs to wear or not
wear”, and warning of the harmful
consequences of such discriminatory
practices.
In August, the minister for education sent
an official bulletin to school directors
prohibiting the wearing of abayas and qamis
in all state schools. The bulletin failed to
define these terms, despite their application
to a range of loose-fitting clothing. Police
were stationed outside some schools and,

171

within a week of the ban, scores of Muslim
girls were refused entry, breaching their
rights to education and non-discrimination.
LGBTI PEOPLE
LGBTI groups signalled an increase in antiLGBTI violence, with LGBTI community
centres across mainland France and in
overseas territories subjected to attacks and
vandalism.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
France’s legal framework regarding the use of
lethal force and firearms by law enforcement
fell short of international human rights law
and standards.
In June, a police officer shot and unlawfully
killed a 17-year-old French child of Algerian
descent, Nahel M, during a traffic stop. The
killing sparked widespread outrage about
lethal force, impunity and systemic racism in
French law enforcement. Large-scale protests
and unrest followed. In some areas, military
units were deployed alongside law
enforcement. At least 32 investigations were
launched into incidents of excessive force by
law enforcement during subsequent protests
and unrest. Delivery driver Mohamed
Bendriss was killed, and scores of people
were seriously injured, some suffering
permanent mutilation, after being struck with
less lethal weapons.
There was no progress towards securing
justice for the killing of Algerian national
Zineb Redouane, who died after she was
struck by a tear gas canister fired by police
during a protest outside her apartment in
December 2018.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Authorities repeatedly resorted to excessive,
disproportionate and illegitimate restrictions
on protests. Protesters were frequently
subjected to arbitrary arrests and fines as
well as confiscation of safety equipment,
protest banners, pots, pans and amplifiers.
Local authorities often pre-emptively
banned protests citing “public order” risks,
without considering alternative options to
facilitate peaceful assembly. In April, a Paris
administrative tribunal overturned the latest

172

in a series of sweeping banning orders
declaring it a “manifestly illegal infringement
of the right to protest … not necessary or
proportionate to the preservation of public
order”.
In July, the administrative court of CergyPontoise upheld a “public order” ban on a
gathering to commemorate the anniversary of
the death in custody of Adama Traoré. Police
carried out violent arrests, and seriously
injured Youssouf Traoré, brother of the late
Adama. The court upheld the banning of a
subsequent protest against police violence
and systemic racism, again citing public
order risks in the wake of widespread
disturbances following the killing of Nahel M.
In October, the minister of the interior
issued a memo calling on local authorities to
pre-emptively ban all Palestine solidarity
protests, a disproportionate and
discriminatory attack on the right to peaceful
assembly. The ban was challenged before the
Council of State, which determined that local
authorities should judge public order risks on
a case-by-case basis.
Dispersal of protests using force, including
indiscriminate baton strikes, was often a
tactic of first resort. In March, the Council of
Europe Commissioner for Human Rights
expressed concern about excessive force and
the arbitrary arrest and detention of
protesters and bystanders. The UN Special
Rapporteur for Environmental Defenders
condemned the “disproportionate” law
enforcement response to an environmental
protest in Sainte-Soline, which had caused
many injuries. One protester required
neurological treatment after being placed in a
month-long induced coma and spending six
weeks in intensive care.
In June, UN rights experts expressed
concern about excessive use of force against
protesters, journalists and bystanders at
pension reform and climate protests,
including the use of stun grenades and tear
gas, and the firing of rubber bullets from
moving vehicles.
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council
of Europe expressed alarm at the injuries

The State of the World’s Human Rights

suffered by protesters, and urged reform of
law enforcement accountability mechanisms.
The European Court of Human Rights
opened an investigation into alleged torture
and other ill-treatment endured by Laurent
Théron, who had lost vision in one eye due to
a stun grenade thrown by a police officer in a
2016 protest.
In Mayotte, law enforcement officers
unlawfully fired live ammunition towards the
ground to disperse crowds during protests
and unrest at the expulsion of undocumented
migrants.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
The Council of State annulled the
government’s dissolution of environmental
activist group Uprisings of the Earth, citing
the need to respect the right to freedom of
association. Members of the group had been
labelled “eco terrorists” by the interior
minister.
During a parliamentary hearing in April,
after the national Human Rights League had
denounced excessive use of force by law
enforcement, the interior minister suggested
that the group’s funding should be
scrutinized.

MASS SURVEILLANCE
Under the premise of hosting the Paris 2024
Olympic Games, parliament passed a new
law authorizing the use by law enforcement
of mass video surveillance technology
powered by artificial intelligence.1 Following
widespread condemnation by civil society
over the threat to privacy, non-discrimination
and other rights, in November the
Constitutional Court ruled unlawful the
Ministry of Justice’s expanded surveillance
powers enabling remote activation of
electronic devices to capture sound and
image. It did, however, approve remote
activation for geolocation.

UNFAIR TRIALS
In April, Hassan Diab was convicted in his
absence for the 1980 bombing of the Rue
Copernic synagogue. The conviction went
ahead despite calls from human rights

The State of the World’s Human Rights

organizations for charges to be dropped on
fair trial grounds and due to major
irregularities in the decades-long pursuit of
Hassan Diab.2

CRUEL, INHUMAN OR DEGRADING
TREATMENT
The UN Committee Against Torture again
raised concern over France’s refusals and
delays in repatriating French national women
and children held in prison-like conditions in
camps in north-east Syria.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
After initial votes in favour in parliament, the
president reaffirmed his support for
enshrining “the freedom to access abortion”
in the constitution in 2024. The UN
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights highlighted the severe inequalities
between metropolitan France and “overseas
territories”, requesting that France address
the “recurring problem of access to water in
Mayotte and Guadeloupe”.
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
In June, the UN Committee on the Rights of
the Child raised concerns over the increasing
number of children and families living in
poverty.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
The Court of Cassation recognized universal
jurisdiction in the French justice system in
relation to two cases concerning war crimes
committed in Syria. In October, parliament
adopted a legislative amendment which
would partially ease requirements for
prosecutions of international crimes such as
war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In June, independent advisory body the High
Council on Climate reported that France was
not making sufficient progress towards its
carbon neutrality goal.
In October, The Guardian newspaper
published a report concluding that French

173

banks were the most prolific financers of the
biggest fossil fuel extraction projects in the
world.
The government published its new
Ecological Planning Strategy, including a
pledge to end coal power use by 2027 having
failed to meet its initial 2022 target.
In November, the Council of State again
fined the government for failing to adequately
tackle air pollution.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Parliament approved a discriminatory,
xenophobic “immigration control” law, which
the Defender of Rights and National
Commission for Human Rights had called to
be rejected on human rights grounds. The
law expanded administrative powers to detain
and expel foreign nationals deemed a “threat
to public order” or to have failed to “respect
republican values”, regardless of residency
status and without precise criteria. It also
undermined the right to family life, housing
and health and re-criminalized “irregular”
residency, an offence previously abolished in
2012.
Barriers to residency renewal, regularization
and appeal rights made the position of
migrants more precarious, while diminishing
judicial expertise at asylum courts reduced
access to justice for asylum seekers. The
practice of administrative detention for
children was retained in Mayotte. Challenges
to multiple provisions of the new law were
brought before the Constitutional Council in
December.
Throughout the year, France issued
expulsion orders to, and detained citizens
from, countries where a forced return could
amount to refoulement, including Syria, Iran,
Sudan, Afghanistan and Haiti.
In November, the interior minister ordered
the deportation of an Uzbek national, “Mr A”,
disregarding a European Court of Human
Rights decision prohibiting his expulsion due
to risk of torture. In December, the Council of
State denounced the deportation and
instructed the government to take all
necessary action to ensure Mr A’s return to
France.

174

In February, the UN Committee on the
Rights of the Child expressed deep concern
about the detention of asylum-seeking
families with children as well as
unaccompanied children. It also criticized
inhumane accommodation and age-testing
methods.
1. “France: Intrusive Olympics surveillance technologies could usher in
a dystopian future”, 20 March
2. “France: Resumption of baseless and flawed Hassan Diab
prosecution undermines effective justice for victims of 1980
synagogue bomb attack”, 15 March

GAMBIA
Republic of the Gambia
Despite significant progress in the
realization of the right to truth, justice and
reparation for the massive human rights
violations committed during the Yahya
Jammeh presidency, there were delays in
providing access to justice and adequate
reparations to victims. Draconian laws
continued to threaten human rights,
including the right to freedom of expression
and media freedom. A national law to
prevent and punish the use of torture was
passed. The ban on female genital
mutilation was not effectively enforced.
Court proceedings started into the deaths in
2022 of more than 60 children after
ingesting a cough syrup. The right to a
healthy environment was threatened by
overfishing and fishmeal factories.

BACKGROUND
The year saw judicial cases linked to crimes
committed during the 22-year rule of former
president Yahya Jammeh. In April, Ousman
Sonko, former minister in Yahya Jammeh’s
government, was charged in a federal court
in Switzerland for crimes against humanity,
including participating, ordering, facilitating
and/or failing to prevent murders, acts of
torture, rapes and illegal detention. Another
trial of an alleged former jungler (member of
a paramilitary death squad) continued in

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Germany for his suspected involvement in
the killings of about 55 West African migrants
in July 2005. In December, the National
Assembly passed the anti-corruption bill.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In April, a study commissioned by Journalists
for Justice, a not-for-profit organization,
highlighted shortcomings in the Truth,
Reconciliation and Reparations Commission
(TRRC)’s reparation programme, including
lack of communication, a limited definition of
“victim”, the exclusion of some survivors of
sexual and gender-based violence, and
inadequate monetary compensation. The
study notably echoed the concerns of a
victims-led organization and the findings of a
2022 report by several NGOs, including the
International Center for Transitional Justice
on reparations for survivors of sexual and
gender-based violence in Gambia.
In May, the government issued an
implementation plan for the TRRC’s
recommendations and announced that the
EU had pledged EUR 9 million to help
Gambia in the transitional justice process in
partnership with the UN Development
Programme, which would provide technical
support. The implementation plan provided
for the creation of a Special Prosecutor’s
Office and a hybrid court in collaboration with
ECOWAS “to try those with the greatest
responsibility”. In July, the government stated
that it would establish a taskforce, which
would include members of civil society, to
expand the work already done by the TRRC
on enforced disappearance.
In July, the ECOWAS Court of Justice ruled
that Gambia had violated the right to life of
Saul Ndow, a critic of Yahya Jammeh’s
government – who was subjected to enforced
disappearance – and that despite the
establishment of the TRRC, the almost 10year delay in prosecuting those suspected to
be responsible was unreasonable. The court
also ordered the government to implement
the TRRC’s recommendations.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
According to the World Press Freedom Index
of Reporters Without Borders, Gambia
ranked 46th in the world and fifth in Africa in
2023. The organization noted that the
country had made progress but also called
on the government to abolish draconian
media laws which continued to restrict the
right to freedom of expression and media
freedom. Section 51 of the Criminal Code
Act, for example, criminalizes sedition against
the president, and section 59 creates the
vague offence of publishing false news with
intent to “cause fear and alarm to the
public”, punishable by two years’
imprisonment.
In June, the Gambian Press Union
condemned the assault on two journalists at
a political event and called on the police to
investigate the incident and end the cycle of
impunity. According to the organization, none
of the 15 cases of assault on journalists they
had recorded from 2017 to 2022 had been
investigated.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In March, the Prevention against Torture Act
was passed by the National Assembly. The
law aimed to prevent, and ensure
accountability for, acts of torture and other illtreatment.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
The Sexual Offences Act continued to
exclude marital rape as an offence, despite
previous calls by human rights activists to
criminalize it.
In March, the head of the UN reproductive
and sexual health agency stated that one in
every two young girls in Gambia had
undergone female genital mutilation, and that
despite the fact that it was outlawed in 2015,
there had been little enforcement, with only
two cases going to trial and no convictions.
She also noted that period poverty – the
inability to pay for menstrual hygiene
products – was rife throughout the country,
particularly in rural areas. In August, three
women were sentenced by a magistrate’s
court in the Central River Region to a fine of

175

15,000 dalasis (USD 223) or a year in jail, for
carrying out female genital mutilation on eight
girls. This was the first ever conviction for
female genital mutilation in Gambia.
A project led by the International Fund for
Agricultural Development was implemented
during the year to increase women’s access
to land. The initial data collected between the
end of 2022 and the beginning of 2023
revealed that although Gambian laws grant
women equal ownership rights, there is often
confusion between customary practices and
legal systems, to the detriment of women.
A report issued by the Gender Management
Information System revealed that between
January and July, Gambia registered 117
cases of rape and 310 cases of gender-based
violence.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In October, the case initiated by 19 families
against the Ministry of Health, the Attorney
General, the Medicines Control Agency and
an Indian pharmaceutical company, went to
trial after a cough syrup allegedly killed more
than 60 children in 2022. After discovering
that the medicines were not registered with
the agency – as required by law – the
government fired two of its executives, and
stated that it was considering legal action
against the Indian pharmaceutical company.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
The government set up a USD 25 million
programme named “PROREFISH Gambia” to
reinforce climate resilience in the fishing
sector. Its implementation was planned for
the 2023 to 2029 period in partnership with
the Food and Agricultural Organization, the
Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of
Fisheries and Water Resources.
In May, Amnesty International published a
report highlighting the negative impact of
overfishing on socio-economic and
environmental rights in the coastal town of
Sanyang, including by foreign industrial
trawlers and a fishmeal factory based there.1
1. Gambia: The Human Cost of Overfishing, 31 May

176

GEORGIA
Georgia
Freedom of expression came under attack.
Law enforcement officials used unnecessary
and excessive force to break up peaceful
protests. Selective justice and politically
motivated prosecution of government
opponents persisted. Police failed to
adequately protect a Pride event. Violence
against women and girls remained
commonplace. Reports of arbitrary
detentions of civilians in the breakaway
territories persisted.

BACKGROUND
The ruling party continued to consolidate
power, attempting to restrict freedoms and
undermine civil society through various
actions, including proposing legislation
resembling the Russian “foreign agent” law.
Georgia’s political divide and public protests
intensified as the government’s commitment
to EU membership was increasingly
questioned in view of growing ties with Russia
and an increase in anti-Western rhetoric. In
November, underscoring popular support,
the European Commission recommended
granting Georgia EU candidate country
status, conditional on, among other things,
improving the rule of law, addressing political
polarization and strengthening judicial
independence. This status was granted in
December.
Migration from Russia following its full-scale
invasion of Ukraine continued to contribute to
spiralling inflation, a cost-of-living increase
and economic inequality.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The right to freedom of expression came
under increased attack, especially following
widespread demonstrations in March, which
forced the government to recall the draft Law
on Transparency of Foreign Influence
targeting independent, foreign-funded
organizations and media outlets as foreign
agents of influence.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

In April, parliament used newly adopted
amendments to the parliamentary code of
conduct for media, which require the consent
of MPs for interviews, to suspend the
accreditations of six journalists, reportedly in
retaliation for their critical questions.
Human rights defenders and other civil
society actors reported increased threats,
smears and harassment for criticizing the
government, as well as risks to physical
safety. In July, at least six government critics
reported being subjected to physical attacks
that appeared coordinated. The attacks were
publicly condoned by senior ruling party
members. On 17 June, students protesting at
Tbilisi State University during a lecture by the
ruling party chair were reportedly beaten by a
group of government supporters. One of the
students described being threatened by a
police officer with a gun while in hospital. An
investigation into the incident was pending at
year’s end.
In October, several activists who took part in
a training run by the NGO Center for Applied
Nonviolent Actions and Strategies, were
called in for questioning by the security
services, who claimed that the trainers were
orchestrating the violent overthrow of the
government. The organizers and the UN
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights defenders dismissed the allegation as
groundless and an attempt to smear civil
society.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The authorities increasingly used
unnecessary and disproportionate force to
break up peaceful protests and introduced
new restrictive measures, particularly after
widespread protests against the draft bill on
transparency of foreign influence. By
contrast, violent groups attacking members of
the political opposition and the LGBTI
community at Pride events, largely enjoyed
impunity and were undeterred by police. On
17 October, the president vetoed an
amendment to the Law on Assemblies and
Demonstrations which would have prohibited
protesters from erecting “temporary
constructions” deemed “not essential” to the

The State of the World’s Human Rights

gathering, thereby placing undue restrictions
on freedom of assembly.
During the largely peaceful protests against
the bill on transparency of foreign influence,
on 2 March police broke up a rally and
arrested 36 people on administrative
charges, including two journalists covering
the demonstration. On 7-8 March police used
tear gas and water cannons without prior
warning against thousands protesting in front
of parliament, arresting 146 on administrative
charges. Dozens were fined between GEL
500 (USD 190) and GEL 2,000 (USD 750)
for petty hooliganism or disobeying police. At
least one protester, Lazare Grigoriadis, was
held in pretrial detention on charges of
violence against police. Parliament withdrew
the bill on 10 March.
On 2 June, seven activists conducting a
peaceful sit-in in front of parliament, holding
banners and blank pieces of paper, were
arrested by police, denied contact with their
families or lawyers, and fined up to GEL
2,000 (USD 750) for hooliganism and
disobeying police.

UNFAIR TRIALS
The judicial system continued to experience
what local NGOs described as a crisis of
legitimacy and trust as concerns regarding
selective justice and politically motivated
prosecutions persisted. On 5 April, the US
Department of State sanctioned four senior
Georgian judges for corruption, abusing their
position and undermining the judicial system.
The trial of former president Mikheil
Saakashvili, imprisoned on charges including
corruption and abuse of power, continued.
On 6 February, a court ruled against his
release on humanitarian grounds, despite his
severely deteriorating health and reported
lack of adequate medical care.
On 23 June Nika Gvaramia, co-founder of
the pro-opposition Mtavari TV, was released
by presidential pardon. He had been
sentenced to three years and six months’
imprisonment on groundless charges of
abuse of power. A week prior, the Supreme
Court had rejected his appeal.

177

On 29 September, a court remanded in
prison Lazare Grigoriadis (see above,
Freedom of assembly) on charges dating to
2021, shortly before the legal limit for his
pretrial detention in relation to the March
protests was due to expire. Following his
arrest on 29 March, senior government
figures repeatedly referred to him as a
criminal and made derogatory comments
regarding his appearance and perceived
sexual orientation.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Anti-LGBTI propaganda by government
officials and their supporters intensified, and
police failed to adequately protect LGBTI
rallies from violent protesters.
On 8 July, approximately 2,000 anti-LGBTI
protesters stormed a private Pride event in
Tbilisi, destroying and looting property,
vandalizing the stage and setting fire to
rainbow flags and placards. The police
present at the scene failed to take action to
prevent these violent disruptions.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Violence against women remained common,
including femicide and other forms of
gender-based violence. On 15 June, in the
case of Gaidukevich v. Georgia, the European
Court of Human Rights found that the
government had violated the right to life and
the prohibition of discrimination by failing to
protect a victim of domestic violence,
including by not conducting an effective
investigation into her presumed suicide.
Violence against women in politics remained
widespread, with a new UN study finding that
the government failed to address the problem
despite its prevalence and severity. Women in
politics continued to face sexist, misogynistic
expressions and gender-based discrimination
against political opponents, especially by
senior members of the ruling party.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
The government published its Long-Term Low
Emission Development Strategy committing
Georgia to “climate neutrality” by 2050.

178

ABKHAZIA AND SOUTH OSSETIA/
TSKHINVALI REGION
Freedom of movement continued to be
restricted between government-controlled
territory and the breakaway regions of
Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Reports of
killings, arbitrary detention and ill-treatment
of civilians by the de facto authorities of the
breakaway regions persisted. On 6
November, one man was shot dead and
another detained by Russian troops while
visiting a church along the South Ossetia
administrative boundary line.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The health of Irakli Bebua, an ethnic
Georgian resident of Gali serving nine years’
imprisonment for burning the Abkhaz flag,
reportedly deteriorated to a critical level due
to chronic diseases and lack of adequate
healthcare in detention. At least seven people
continued to be held in arbitrary detention in
substandard conditions by the de facto
authorities of the breakaway regions.

GERMANY
Federal Republic of Germany
Accountability for discriminatory abuses by
police was hampered by the lack of
effective independent complaints
mechanisms. Several protests in solidarity
with the rights of Palestinians were banned
pre-emptively. Cases of administrative
detention against climate activists gave rise
to multiple human rights concerns.
Politically motivated raids and physical
attacks at refugee reception centres
increased significantly. A court found the
government in breach of the Climate
Protection Act.

DISCRIMINATION
In May, the Federal Ministry of the Interior
reported that hate crimes in the previous year
had reached the highest number recorded.
Every day, around seven antisemitic hate
crimes were committed. Increases included
hate crimes against Roma people (33%), and

The State of the World’s Human Rights

those based on sexual orientation (15%),
racism (14%), xenophobia (13%) and
“hostility towards foreigners” (9%), with the
latter three remaining the most common in
absolute terms. According to the report of the
Independent Expert Group on Anti-Muslim
Sentiment presented in June, anti-Muslim
racism was widespread across German
society. Following the Hamas attacks in Israel
on 7 October, and the subsequent Israeli
bombardment and ground invasion of Gaza,
civil society organizations reported a rise in
antisemitic attacks against Jewish individuals
and institutions as well as racist attacks
against Muslims.
In October, a study by the Fundamental
Rights Agency found that Germany was one
of the top two countries in the EU where
people of African descent experienced racial
discrimination. A research project funded by
the German Research Foundation found that
33% of respondents felt they had been
discriminated against during interactions with
police. Marginalized groups such as
racialized people, LGBTI+ people and
homeless people were at particular risk of
discrimination and less likely to make
complaints.
The Council of Europe decided to use
enhanced supervision for the judgment on
Basu v. Germany concerning inadequate
investigations into allegations of racial
profiling. The lack of effective, independent
complaints mechanisms and mandatory
identification badges for police at federal and
state levels continued to hamper
investigations into allegations of human rights
violations by police.
LGBTI PEOPLE
In March, an amendment to the Transfusion
Act was passed, abolishing the discriminatory
exclusion of gay and bisexual men as well as
transgender people from blood donation.
Parliament discussed a new SelfDetermination Act enabling trans, non-binary
and intersex people to obtain legal gender
recognition by making a simple declaration at
the registry office.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
According to figures presented by the Federal
Criminal Police Office in July, more cases of
gender-based violence were registered in
2022 than in the previous five years. Every
hour, more than 14 women were victims of
intimate partner violence. Almost every day, a
partner or ex-partner tried to kill a woman.
From 1 October, motives based on gender
or sexual orientation were explicitly included
in the Criminal Code as aggravating factors
for all crimes.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In May, the Berlin Assembly Authorities preemptively imposed blanket bans on protests
in solidarity with the rights of Palestinians
around the Nakba Remembrance Day in
violation of the right to peaceful assembly.
The grounds for the bans also violated the
right to non-discrimination as they were
based on stigmatizing and racist stereotypes
of people perceived as Arab or Muslim. Also,
after 7 October, numerous protests in
solidarity with Palestinians were preemptively banned. There were media reports
of unnecessary and excessive use of force by
police, hundreds of arrests and increased
racial profiling of people perceived as Arab or
Muslim in the context of these protests.
Ahead of the international automotive fair in
September, at least 27 climate activists were
placed in preventative detention for up to 30
days under Section 17 of the Bavarian Police
Tasks Act, allowing the police to request
detention without concrete suspicion of a
crime or initiating a criminal proceeding.
There were several media reports of
excessive use of force in policing peaceful
protests, including pain compliance holds as
a means of dispersing climate activists
blocking streets.
Public Prosecutor’s Offices in two federal
states investigated climate activist groups
under Section 129 of the Criminal Code,
accusing them of forming a criminal
organization. These investigations involved
extensive search and surveillance measures,
including the interception of a press
telephone and the confiscation of personal

179

data from support groups, creating a chilling
effect on peaceful protest.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
After 7 October, a number of different
restrictions on freedom of expression were
imposed, particularly against those
expressing solidarity with Palestinians. In
November, the federal Ministry of Interior
banned the phrase “from the river to the sea”
as a symbol of Hamas, despite the slogan
historically being used with a variety of
different connotations and by different actors.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In February, seven UN Special Rapporteurs
expressed grave concerns at the alleged
“lack of effective reparative measures
afforded” to Ovaherero and Nama peoples in
Germany’s former colony of “Southwest
Africa” (now Namibia), including lack of “an
unqualified recognition of the genocide
committed” against them during colonization
between 1904 and 1908.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Some 1.1 million people from Ukraine were
residing in Germany, of whom around
900,000 held a resident permit under the
Temporary Protection Directive. Germany
launched a humanitarian admissions
programme for Afghans at risk in October
2022, which was originally designed to admit
1,000 individuals per month, but only 94
Afghan nationals had been transferred to
Germany by the end of the year.
Politically motivated raids, assaults,
vandalism and physical attacks on refugee
reception centres increased significantly
compared to 2022. The majority of the
attacks were allegedly committed by farright suspects. Family reunification
procedures for refugees in Germany
continued to be slow, leaving many families
still separated after years apart.
Family reunification for subsidiary protection
holders was subject to quotas and under the
administration’s discretion.

180

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In February, the Federal Constitutional Court
set high thresholds for the use of automated
data analysis in police operations, ruling that
it interfered with the right of the individual to
make decisions based on informed consent
concerning the communication of personal
data to others.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
On 1 January, the Corporate Due Diligence
Obligations in Supply Chains Act entered into
force, creating binding obligations on
enterprises to respect human rights. The law
applied only to enterprises with 3,000 or
more employees, to be extended to those
with 1,000 employees from 2024. The law
created no civil liability for violations.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
A commission was instituted in March to
discuss “reproductive self-determination and
reproductive medicine”. However, despite the
urging of the CEDAW Committee in May, no
changes were proposed to fully decriminalize
abortion to bring it into line with international
human rights standards and the new WHO
guidelines.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In June, the cabinet approved a legislative
proposal to amend the Federal Climate
Protection Act. This would abolish binding
emission reduction goals for each economic
sector and requirement for the adoption of
emergency programmes if these were not
met. A ruling by the Berlin-Brandenburg
Higher Regional Administrative Court in
November confirmed that emissions budgets
in the transport and building sectors were not
met in 2021 or 2022.
Despite Germany’s self-imposed obligation
to end the international financial support of
fossil fuels projects by the end of 2022, stateowned development banks approved
international finance for at least three
projects in 2023.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
In April, Germany ratified the Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. As a
result, from 20 July, individual complaints
could be submitted to the Committee on the
Covenant.

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
The government introduced “general
licences” for the export of certain military
equipment and dual-use goods. These
replaced the making of decisions on a caseby-case basis, further reducing transparency
and potentially facilitating irresponsible
exports.
Despite mounting evidence of war crimes by
the Israeli army in the occupied Gaza Strip,
Germany continued to grant licences for the
export of military equipment to Israel.
Germany also licensed arms transfers posing
a high risk to human rights and international
humanitarian law to Saudi Arabia and the
UAE.

GHANA
Republic of Ghana
The president declined to sign into law a
bill passed in parliament to proscribe
accusations of witchcraft. A bill to further
criminalize LGBTI people progressed in
parliament. A partial abolition of the death
penalty was revoked. The rights to freedom
of expression and peaceful assembly
continued to be threatened, and authorities
used excessive force to disperse protests.
The right to health of pregnant women was
threatened by lack of access to medical
facilities. Environmental activists decried
the pollution generated by second-hand
clothing imports.

BACKGROUND
The year was marked by high costs of living
and food inflation amid growing national
debt. In May, the International Monetary

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Fund approved a three-year, USD 3 billion
programme for Ghana with an immediate
disbursement of USD 600 million. The rest
was contingent on Ghana following through
with commitments to restructure its domestic
and external debts, cut spending and make
fiscal adjustments, thus raising concerns
about potential impacts on economic and
social rights. The inflation rate reached
53.6% in January but fell to 26.4% in
November. In October, the World Bank’s food
security update ranked Ghana among 10
countries with the highest food inflation.
In July, UNHCR, the UN refugee agency,
cautioned Ghana over its non-refoulement
obligation after the government repatriated
more than 500 Burkinabe people to Burkina
Faso.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Female genital mutilation (FGM) continued to
be practised but there was progress in
changing attitudes. In April, 15 former
“female circumcisers” in Wa renounced FGM
while traditional leaders in the city
denounced and committed to help combat
the practice.
On 3 July, Tamale High Court condemned
two women to 12 years in prison for the 2020
manslaughter of a 90-year-old woman
accused of witchcraft. On 27 July, the
parliament passed a law making it a crime to
accuse someone of witchcraft and requiring
the dismantling of “witch camps” for accused
women banished or fleeing from their
villages. In December, the president declined
to sign the bill into law, citing procedural
issues.
On 31 October, the Affirmative Action bill
aimed at increasing the participation of
women in public office had its first official
reading in parliament, having first been
introduced in 2016. The bill was still pending
at the end of year.

LGBTI PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
On 7 July, the parliament unanimously
approved the 2021 Promotion of Appropriate
Sexual Rights and Family Values bill during
its second reading, taking it one step further

181

to becoming law. The bill further criminalized
LGBTI people and introduced prison
sentences for anyone expressing support or
“sympathy” towards LGBTI people. LGBTI
rights activists expressed concerns over their
safety should the bill be passed. In the same
month, the Supreme Court dismissed a legal
challenge to block parliament from passing
the bill.

DEATH PENALTY
On 25 July, the parliament voted to remove
the death penalty from the 1960 Criminal
and Other Offences Act and the 1962 Armed
Forces Act.1 The president assented to the
amendments the following month, making
them law. In December, however, he revoked
the changes, citing procedural issues. The
constitution also continued to provide for the
death penalty for high treason.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Four years after the murder of Ghanaian
investigative journalist Ahmed Divela, the
investigation was ongoing, and no one had
been brought to justice.
In April, a coalition of media associations
asked for a repeal of Section 76 of the
Electronic Communications Act and Section
208 of the Criminal and Other Offences Act,
arguing that these laws had been
“weaponized” to arrest several journalists and
restrict the right to freedom of expression.
Reporters Without Borders ranked Ghana
62nd among the 180 countries surveyed in
its 2023 World Press Freedom Index, down
two places from 2022.
In September, the police filed an injunction
to prevent a planned protest over the high
cost of living taking place, from 21 to 23
September, outside the presidential palace in
the capital, Accra. The police arrested at
least 49 protesters for unlawful assembly
when the protest went ahead on 21
September, releasing them on bail the same
day.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
On 7 March, in Ashaiman, the military used
excessive force, including beating and
kicking people, while investigating the
murder of one of their colleagues. During the
operation, Ghana Armed Forces detained
184 people. The deputy defence minister
apologized that innocent people were caught
up in the operation. Parliament’s Committee
on Defence and the Interior stated that it had
conducted investigations but, at the end of
the year, no report had been published.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In February, the Ghana Health Service
revealed that 27 pregnant women in Bawku
municipality had died between 2021 and
2022 due to their inability to access medical
services. While some were unable to get to
the hospital in time, others died due to staff
shortages.
In April, Ghana became the first country to
approve a malaria vaccine developed by
Oxford University.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Environmental activists warned that the
government’s plan to import liquefied natural
gas under a 17-year agreement would lead to
more use of carbon and delay the transition
to cleaner energy.
Environmental activists, clothes traders and
fishermen denounced the pollution created
by used textiles coming into the country from
abroad. Fast fashion clothes donated from
overseas continued to find their way to
second-hand markets such as Kantamanto in
Accra, with huge volumes then being
discarded as waste due to poor quality and
ending up on the beaches of Accra and in
the Odaw river, the Korle Lagoon or the sea.
1. “Ghana: Landmark vote to remove death penalty from laws is a major
step forward”, 25 July

GREECE
Hellenic Republic

182

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Reports of unlawful use of force in the
policing of demonstrations persisted.
Survivors of a shipwreck in which more than
600 people died blamed the Greek
authorities for causing the incident. Human
rights defenders continued to face
criminalization for their work with refugees
and migrants. An investigation by Greece’s
data protection authority identified 88
individuals as targets of Predator spyware.
Violations of the rights of conscientious
objectors to military service persisted.
Destructive wildfires resulted in the loss of
lives and natural habitat amid concerns at
the failure of the firefighting system.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Reports persisted of unlawful use of force in
police operations, including the policing of
demonstrations such as protests following the
Tempi rail disaster in February.
In June, a court in the capital, Athens,
convicted a police officer of torture in its
“misdemeanour form” for beating a student
during a Covid-19 check in Nea Smyrni
square in March 2021. A second police
officer was convicted as an accessory.
In November, an appeals court found police
responsible for the life-threatening injuries
sustained by psychologist Yiannis Kafkas
during a 2011 demonstration in Athens, and
awarded him compensation.

RIGHT TO LIFE
In September, Kostas Manioudakis died
following alleged ill-treatment by police
during a stop-and-search operation in the
village of Vryses in Crete.
In October, a prosecutor proposed indicting
a police officer for intentional homicide and
illegally discharging his weapon in relation to
the lethal shooting of a 16-year-old Roma,
Kostas Frangoulis, in 2022 in the city of
Thessaloniki.
In November, 17-year-old Christos
Michalopoulos was fatally shot by a police
officer in Leontari in Aliartos municipality
following a car chase. The officer was
charged with homicide with possible intent
and illegally discharging his firearm.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Human rights violations continued at
Greece’s borders, including unlawful,
summary returns, in some cases
accompanied by violence.
On 14 June, several hours after its initial
sighting by an aircraft of Frontex, the EU
Border and Coast Guard Agency, , a boat
carrying an estimated 750 people, including
many children, sank off the coast of Pylos.
Only 104 people survived. Survivors
consistently told Amnesty International and
Human Rights Watch (HRW) that the Greek
coastguard had towed the vessel with a rope,
causing it to veer and then capsize.
Independent reports by reputable NGOs and
media sources described a similar version of
events, but this narrative was strongly denied
by the Greek authorities.1 Amnesty
International and HRW also documented
serious failures by the Greek authorities in
handling the rescue efforts, noting in addition
that the subsequent investigations opened by
the Greek authorities into the actions of the
coastguard made little progress and that
authorities may have undermined the
integrity of key evidence. In November, the
Greek Ombudsman opened an inquiry into
the coastguard’s actions, citing their refusal
to conduct an internal disciplinary
investigation. In July, the EU Ombudsman
announced an inquiry into the role of Frontex
in search-and-rescue activities in the
Mediterranean, including in the Pylos
shipwreck. The incident highlighted the
desperate need for safe and legal migration
routes to Europe.
From July, there was a rise in refugees and
migrants arriving by sea, bringing the total
arrivals for the year to more than 41,000,
compared with fewer than 13,000 in 2022.
This exacerbated the already challenging
living conditions in the reception facilities on
the islands, such as in the “closed controlled
access centre” (CCAC) on Samos, where the
authorities imposed a regime of de facto
detention on new arrivals. In January, the
European Commission initiated infringement
proceedings regarding Greece’s failure to
comply with EU law on asylum and migration.

183

This concerned obstacles to refugees’ access
to social protection, and the practice
introduced by domestic law in 2022 of
depriving people in reception and
identification procedures of their liberty for up
to 25 days. In July, the EU Ombudsman
opened an inquiry into how the European
Commission ensures compliance with
fundamental rights in the context of its
support to CCACs.
In October, the European Court of Human
Rights condemned Greece for failing to grant
adequate medical care to an HIV-positive
asylum seeker in two reception facilities.
Wildfires in the Evros region (see below,
Right to a healthy environment) fuelled racist
rhetoric and abuses against migrants and
refugees.
A legislative amendment passed in
December allowed undocumented migrants
who had been in Greece for at least three
years as of the end of November 2023, and
who held a job offer, to apply for a three-year
residence permit. The amendment also
reduced the time asylum seekers were
required to wait before being able to work
from six months to 60 days from the time
their asylum requests were lodged.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders continued to face
criminalization for their work with refugees
and migrants. Although misdemeanour
charges against Sarah Mardini and Séan
Binder were dropped in August by the
Supreme Court, the following month they and
22 other defendants were indicted for four
felonies including forming and membership
of a criminal organization, and facilitating
irregular entry.
Concerns remained about the criminal
charges ongoing against Panayote Dimitras,
spokesperson of the NGO Greek Helsinki
Monitor (GHM), and Tommy Olsen, head of
the NGO Aegean Boat Report, in relation to
their work assisting refugees and migrants at
Greece’s borders and reporting cases of
border violence and unlawful returns. In
January, authorities imposed restrictive
measures on Panayote Dimitras, although a

184

ban on him working with the GHM was
reversed in May. NGOs were also concerned
about a smear campaign and judicial
harassment of Panayote Dimitras.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In July, an investigation by Greece’s data
protection authority into the use of Predator
spyware traced 350 SMS messages
attempting to install surveillance software; 88
individuals were notified that their mobile
phones had been targeted.
In September, civil society and members of
the European Parliament expressed concern
about the sudden replacement by the Greek
parliament of several members of the
Hellenic Authority for Communication
Security and Privacy (ADAE) at a crucial time
for the investigation of the spyware scandal.
In October, during a European Parliament
committee hearing, the head of ADAE
expressed his concern that a current and a
former member of ADAE were subjects of a
criminal investigation, while to date no one
had been charged for spyware use.

RIGHTS OF PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
In September, a ferry captain and three of his
crew were charged in connection with the
drowning of Antonis Kargiotis, a ferry
passenger. One of the crew was recorded
using racist slurs about Antonis Kargiotis.
Disability rights activists called on authorities
to investigate a possible hate motive behind
the case, due to the victim’s reported health
condition.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
During the year, derogatory and harmful
discourse in political and media spheres
about LGBTI people sparked concern.
In April, the Racist Violence Recording
Network reported 38 hate crimes in 2022
where the targets were LGBTI individuals or
those defending their rights.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In April, it was reported that in December
2022 a court had accepted in part a civil
lawsuit against journalist Stavroula Poulimeni

The State of the World’s Human Rights

and the independent media cooperative
Alterthess, ordering the media outlet to pay
EUR 3,000 in damages to a gold mining
company’s senior executive. An appeal was
filed against the ruling. The case, bearing the
hallmarks of a strategic lawsuit against public
participation (SLAPP),) stemmed from an
alleged breach of data protection laws after
Stavroula Poulimeni reported on the
executive’s conviction by a first instance court
for environmental damage.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Between January and early December, there
were 14 reported femicides. In its November
report, the Group of Experts monitoring the
implementation of the Council of Europe
Convention on preventing and combating
violence against women and domestic
violence (GREVIO) expressed deep concern
that the 2021 “joint custody” legislation
lacked sufficient safeguards to ensure that
incidents of domestic violence were taken
into account in the determination of child
custody and visitation rights.
In October, a prosecutor proposed indicting
two police officers for the group rape of a
young woman at Omónia police station in
Athens in October 2022, and a third police
officer as an accessory.

CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS’ RIGHTS
Conscientious objectors continued to face
arrest and repeated punishment through
fines and trials by military courts. According
to information published in 2023, 67% of
applications for conscientious objector status
invoking non-religious grounds were rejected
in 2022. Some of those discriminatory
rejections were annulled by the Supreme
Administrative Court, while others were
pending before the court at year’s end.
Greece still failed to implement the 2021
UN Human Rights Committee decision
concerning the case of conscientious
objector Lazaros Petromelidis, which found
multiple violations of the ICCPR.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In September, the Council of Europe’s
European Committee of Social Rights found
admissible a collective complaint filed by
Amnesty International. The complaint argued
that the Greek government had violated
provisions of the European Social Charter on
the right to health and the prohibition on
discrimination due to the impact on the
health system of austerity measures
introduced after the 2009-2010 financial
crisis.
During the year, heath workers’ unions
reported significant challenges including
persistent lack of staff and underfunding.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Despite reported progress in reducing
greenhouse gas emissions, fossil fuels still
accounted for most of Greece’s energy use.
In December, three environmental
organizations asked the European
Commission to hold Greece accountable for
systematically giving a “free pass” to oil and
gas drilling off the country’s coasts.
Human-induced climate change was found
to increase the likelihood and intensity of
extreme heat and floods in Greece. Between
July and September, destructive wildfires and
floods resulted in at least 38 confirmed
deaths and the loss of natural habitat, the
lives of thousands of animals and people’s
livelihoods. The wildfire in Evros region was
the largest ever recorded in the EU and killed
at least 20 people thought to be refugees and
migrants.2 Following the catastrophic
wildfires, the World Wildlife Fund expressed
concern at the failure of the national
firefighting system and urged the authorities
to adopt radical changes to protect forests.
1. “Greece: 6 months on, no justice for Pylos shipwreck”, 14 December
2. “Greece: Evros wildfire dead are victims of ‘two great injustices of
our times’”, 23 August

185

GUATEMALA
Republic of Guatemala
Civic space and freedom of expression were
curtailed. There was widespread
criminalization of judges, prosecutors,
human rights defenders, journalists and key
actors in the electoral process, forcing them
into exile. The authorities stigmatized and
failed to protect protesters demanding the
resignation of the attorney general.
Violations of the rights of women, LGBTI
people and Indigenous Peoples persisted.

BACKGROUND
The electoral process in 2023 was beset with
irregularities. Some Supreme Electoral
Tribunal magistrates and several members of
Semilla, the winning party of the presidential
elections, were targeted with criminal
lawsuits. The Semilla party was temporarily
suspended, and in December, the
Prosecutor’s Office requested to lift the
immunity of the newly elected president and
vice-president. Various members of the
international community denounced this
persecution as undermining the rights to
participation in public affairs and rule of law.
High levels of inequality, poverty and
violence remained the main reasons for the
forced migration of thousands of people from
the country.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
In October, thousands of people around the
country took to the streets to protest at the
criminal prosecution of key actors in the
electoral process. These peaceful mass
protests, convened by Indigenous authorities
to demand the resignation of the attorney
general, paralysed the country for more than
three weeks. The government and the
Constitutional Court stigmatized the
protesters.1 According to local organizations,
the authorities also failed to protect protesters
against intimidation and attacks by armed
individuals in several parts of the country,

186

which left at least one person dead in the
town of Malacatán in San Marcos
municipality.
In October, a court overturned the six-year
prison sentence handed down in June
against journalist José Ruben Zamora, who in
spite of this remained in detention at the end
of the year. The Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights and international
organizations had denounced violations of his
rights to due process and judicial guarantees.

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND UNFAIR
TRIALS
International and regional human rights
bodies expressed concerns about the lack of
independence of the judiciary and the
arbitrary actions by the Public Prosecutor’s
Office against people who were fighting
impunity and corruption, as well as key
actors in the electoral process. At the end of
the year, at least 79 prosecutors, judges,
human rights defenders and journalists were
in exile for fear of being unjustly imprisoned.
In May, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention declared the detention of former
anti-corruption prosecutor Virginia Laparra
arbitrary and demanded her release. In
December, the Supreme Court of Justice
ordered that she be granted domiciliary arrest
because she had already spent half of the
sentence in jail. In addition, a second
criminal proceeding against her was pending
at the end of the year.2

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders continued to carry
out their activities in a hostile and high-risk
environment. The Unit for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders in Guatemala
(UDEFEGUA) reported 5,965 attacks against
human rights defenders between January
and November, including threats, killings,
harassment and arbitrary detentions.
Criminalization increased, particularly against
those involved in the fight against impunity
and corruption. Human rights defender
Claudia González, wrongly accused of the
crime of abuse of authority, was released on
bail after two months in detention.3

The State of the World’s Human Rights

IMPUNITY
There was little progress in the investigation
and prosecution of human rights violations
and war crimes perpetrated during the
internal armed conflict between 1960 and
1996. A bill that would grant amnesty for
those suspected of criminal responsibility for
these crimes advanced in Congress. It was
still pending approval at the end of the year.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Levels of violence against women and girls
remained high. Local organizations reported
difficulties in accessing justice for women
survivors of gender-based violence.
The CEDAW Committee raised concerns
about the criminalization of abortion in
Guatemala, where it was only permitted if the
life of the pregnant woman was at risk, and
the limited access to safe abortion and postabortion services. High rates of child
pregnancy remained of particular concern.
Between January and October, the
Observatory on Sexual and Reproductive
Health recorded 52,878 births to girls and
young women aged between 10 and 19.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
LGBTI people faced high levels of violence
and discrimination. According to the National
LGBTIQ+ Human Rights Observatory, at least
34 people were killed because of their sexual
orientation or gender identity during the year.
Same-sex marriage remained illegal.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Indigenous Peoples continued to demand
that their rights to their lands be recognized.
In a context of insecure land tenure, violent
evictions were reported. Ancestral authorities
and those who defend land and territory
faced unfounded criminal charges.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
The National Climate Change Fund, created
in 2022, was still not operating by the end of
the year.
The authorities warned that droughts and
floods, linked to the impacts of El Niño and

The State of the World’s Human Rights

aggravated by climate change, could
exacerbate malnutrition.
1. “Guatemala: Peaceful protesters face imminent risks”, 12 October
2. “Guatemala: Prisoner of conscience Virginia Laparra has now been
arbitrarily detained in prison for one year”, 23 February
3. “Guatemala: Freedom for Claudia González”, 12 September (Spanish
only)

GUINEA
Republic of Guinea
Access to the main social networks was
disrupted, and news websites, radio and
television were targeted. All demonstrations
continued to be banned except those in
favour of the transitional authorities.
Security forces killed demonstrators and
arbitrarily arrested journalists. Four people
were convicted in the M’Mah Sylla case.
The authorities launched legal proceedings
on marine pollution.

BACKGROUND
The trial of former head of state Moussa
Dadis Camara and several former senior
security officials for their role in the 28
September 2009 massacre – during which
157 people were killed by defence and
security forces and more than 100 were
victims of sexual violence – resumed on 13
November, nine days after an armed
commando attacked Conakry prison and
released four of the main defendants,
including Moussa Dadis Camara. All were
caught except for Claude Pivi, former
minister of presidential security. Following an
explosion at the country’s main fuel depot in
Conakry on the night of 17/18 December –
killing 24 people and injuring more than 450
– the resulting fuel shortage led to an
increase in the cost of living, school and
university closures and frequent power cuts.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
On 31 October, the ECOWAS Court of Justice
ruled that Guinea had violated the rights to
freedom of expression and of information by

187

restricting access to the internet and to social
media in 2020.
Access to the main social networks
remained disrupted since 24 November, with
no official explanation from the authorities.
Access to social networks and news websites
was previously disrupted from 17 May during
anti-government protests, and restored
around a week later. On 30 November,
Ousmane Gaoual Diallo, minister of post,
telecommunications and digital economy,
stated that “the internet is not a right”. He
had acknowledged the previous disruption to
the internet, but attributed it to a technical
problem with an undersea cable. The news
website Guineematin.com was inaccessible
from 15 August to 5 November, with no
reason given. The High Authority of
Communication wrote to Canal + Guinée on 6
and 9 December to ask them to stop
broadcasting Djoma FM and TV, Espace FM
and TV and Évasion FM and TV for “national
security reasons”. Another distributor,
StarTimes, announced the withdrawal of
Djoma TV, Espace TV and Évasion TV for the
same reasons.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
A blanket ban on all political gatherings in
Guinea remained in place since May 2022.
In Conakry, however, although gatherings
called by the opposition Living Forces of
Guinea coalition were prohibited, several
rallies in support of the head of state were
allowed to go ahead.
On 1 June, the Kankan court of first
instance sentenced two women to six
months’ imprisonment – four months
suspended – and a fine of GNF 1 million
(around EUR 110) each, and seven women
to a six months’ suspended sentence and a
fine of GNF 500,000 (around EUR 55). All
nine were convicted of “criminal participation
in an assembly”, after marching on 24 May
to demand the return to power of former
president Alpha Condé.
Following violent protests on the night of
27-28 March in Kankan against the lack of
electricity, during which an image of the
president was burnt, on 13 April the city’s

188

court of first instance sentenced 15 people to
imprisonment of between four and 18
months, including on charges of
unauthorized assembly.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
According to civil society organizations,
media and political parties, since 5
September 2021 at least 37 people had been
killed by defence and security forces during
protests.
One person was killed in Wonkifong, Kindia
region on 16 April during an anti-drugs
operation by the security forces. Several
people were wounded in Boffa, Boké region
on 19 September when the military allegedly
shot at people who had blocked roads to
protest against the lack of electricity.
On 27 March, the Dixinn court of first
instance in Conakry sentenced a senior
officer of the gendarmerie to 10 years’
imprisonment and ordered him to pay GNF
100 million (around EUR 11,000) in
damages for the murder of a 19-year-old man
on 1 June 2022 in Hamdallaye, Conakry
during a demonstration against the increase
in the price of petrol.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Oumar Sylla and Ibrahima Diallo of the
National Front for the Defence of the
Constitution and Saikou Yaya Barry of the
Union of Republican Forces were
provisionally released on 10 May after more
than 10 months’ arbitrary detention. They
had been accused of “criminal participation
in an assembly, complicity in the destruction
of public and private buildings, intentional
assault and battery, arson and looting” for
mobilizing to demand the restoration of the
constitutional order. On 13 June, the Dixinn
court of first instance in Conakry acquitted
Oumar Sylla and Ibrahima Diallo.
On 16 October, 13 journalists were violently
and arbitrarily arrested in Kaloum, Conakry,
taken to the central police station and then
indicted at the court of first instance. They
had been taking part in a peaceful
demonstration organized by the Guinean
Union of Press Professionals to demand that

The State of the World’s Human Rights

the authorities lift restrictions on access to
certain news websites.1 They were released
the same day after being charged with
“participating in an illegal assembly on a
public highway”.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
On 4 April, four men were sentenced by the
court of first instance in Mafanco, Conakry to
between one and 20 years’ imprisonment for
the rape and other abuses leading to the
death of M’Mah Sylla on 20 November 2021.
The perpetrators were also ordered to pay
GNF 1 billion (around EUR 110,000) in
damages to the victim’s father.
On 18 October, the UN agencies in Guinea
called on the authorities to fulfil their
obligations to combat violence against
women and girls, following the death of a
nine-year-old girl after being raped in
Dubréka, Kindia region four days earlier.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In March, the president officially relaunched
work on the Simandou iron ore mine,
planned to include the construction of a
railway and a port, despite concerns by civil
society organizations about the
consequences on local residents’ economic
and social rights, and impacts on climate
change. After 500 fishermen complained of
skin rashes, Guinean authorities carried out
an inspection on 14 April and found large
areas of pollution 74km off the coast of
Conakry. On 19 June, the Ministry of Justice
asked the Court for the Repression of
Economic and Financial Offences to initiate
legal proceedings against “suspected ore
carriers, individuals or legal entities that own,
use or are responsible for the said ships”, for
“alleged acts of marine pollution causing skin
rashes among small-scale fishermen and
environmental damage”.
1. “Guinea: Amnesty International calls for charges to be dropped
against 13 journalists who took part in a peaceful rally”, 19 October

The State of the World’s Human Rights

HAITI
Republic of Haiti
Hunger and lack of essential goods and
services were widespread. Gang violence
including killings, abductions and sexual
violence remained unpunished. Judges,
prosecutors, journalists and human rights
defenders were at risk. Hundreds of
thousands of people remained internally
displaced or fled the country, while the USA
and the Dominican Republic offered
Haitians limited access to international
protection and expelled thousands of them.

BACKGROUND
Criminal groups were present throughout the
country and exercised considerable influence
over important areas of the country, including
the capital, Port-au-Prince, and its
metropolitan area.
In October, the UN Security Council
approved the deployment of a multinational
security support mission in Haiti, a measure
requested by the Haitian government. The
mission was going to be led by Kenyan law
enforcement, which had a record of
excessive and unnecessary use of force,
including lethal force.1

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
The scarcity of essential goods and services
continued throughout the year. In July, the
World Food Programme announced that it
would have to stop providing food assistance
to 100,000 people due to budget cuts,
despite the fact that half of the population
(4.9 million people) were unable to source
food daily. Despite a slight reduction in
expected hunger levels announced by the
government and UN agencies, millions
continued to lack sufficient food, and
environmental changes and climate shocks
affected food production.
Health services were insufficient and had
reduced capacity due to economic
constraints and violence that had caused

189

displacement of people and interference with
humanitarian operations. Cholera cases
surged in June in the context of an epidemic
that had seen nearly 70,000 suspected cases
since October 2022. In May, the WHO
announced further support and funding to
help overcome health deficits.

IMPUNITY
Impunity for the widespread violence across
the country continued to be almost absolute.
Sexual violence was prevalent, including rape
of women and girls to instil fear, gain and
demonstrate control, or as punishment,
according to Human Rights Watch.
In February, the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights called on authorities to
strengthen the security forces and the judicial
system to address gang-related violence.
The Office of the Special Rapporteur for
Freedom of Expression of the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights alerted that at
least three journalists were killed in 2023:
Paul Jean Marie of Radio Lumière, Ricot
Jean of Radio-Télé Évolution Inter, and
Dumesky Kersaint of Radio Télé Inurep.
Dozens of journalists fled their homes amid
harassment, abductions, shootings and
assaults on media facilities.
In May, armed individuals on a motorcycle
opened fire on the vehicle of Judge Wilner
Morin, who handled corruption cases and
was the president of the National Association
of Haitian Judges. In September, Québex
Jean, deputy prosecutor in Mirebalais district,
was killed at his home by unidentified armed
individuals. The investigations into these
cases were ongoing at the end of the year.
On 26 August, armed individuals opened
fire on a group of people protesting against
the prevalence of crime and violence in Haiti,
killing at least seven people and injuring 10.
The march took place in Canaan settlement,
north of Port-au-Prince, and was attended by
hundreds of protesters.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Despite the November 2022 call by UNHCR,
the UN refugee agency, to halt the
deportation of Haitians, the Dominican

190

Republic forcibly returned thousands of
Haitians and closed the border with Haiti.
The USA continued to deport Haitian
nationals despite a US extension and
redesignation of Temporary Protected Status
for Haitians in February 2023 and the
continued operation of humanitarian parole
programmes.
By June, more than 190,000 people
remained internally displaced, according to
the International Organization for Migration.
Most of these people had fled their homes in
response to armed gang violence.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In March, the Inter-American Court on
Human Rights ordered provisional measures
in favour of members of the human rights
organization ECCREDHH. The court
considered that the group were at risk of
suffering irreparable harm to their rights to
life and personal integrity. Members of the
group had faced harassment and violence by
unknown assailants since at least 2015 in a
context of generalized violence against
human rights defenders.
On 18 August, armed individuals shot at the
headquarters of the NGO National Human
Rights Defence Network (RNDDH) in Portau-Prince. The attack occurred hours after
the organization published an investigative
report on the crisis of violence in Haiti.
RNDDH believed that a police officer had
been involved in the shooting.
1. “Haiti: Open letter to all members of the Security Council regarding
the development of an international security force in Haiti”, 18
August

HONDURAS
Republic of Honduras
The militarization of public security and
violence towards human rights defenders
caused great concern. Some progress was
made around sexual and reproductive
rights, but abortion remained illegal. LGBTI
people faced violence and discrimination.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

The government failed to take measures to
address climate change.

BACKGROUND
After weeks of impasse, Congress designated
an interim attorney general in November,
which was highly criticized. The process of
creating an international commission against
impunity was underway but still pending at
the end of the year. In June, the government
deployed military and law enforcement police
to control prisons after a clash that killed 46
people in a women’s prison. Thousands of
people were forced to leave the country due
to the high levels of violence, impunity,
inequality and poverty, the impacts of which
were exacerbated by climate change.

EXCESSIVE AND UNNECESSARY USE OF
FORCE
At the end of the year, the state of emergency
allowing militarization and restriction of rights
in more than half of the country’s
municipalities had been in force for more
than 12 months. The Ombudsperson
(CONADEH) registered more than 360
complaints against security forces and
questioned the necessity and proportionality
of the prolonged measure.
The UN Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial
executions expressed concern about the
widespread impunity, limited investigative
capacity, and lack of independent and
impartial investigations. A police officer was
convicted for negligence causing the death of
Keyla Martinez, who died in police custody in
2021. The prosecutor’s office, civil society
organizations and Keyla Martinez’s family
rejected the conviction, which did not
consider key evidence or gender-based
violence.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
According to Global Witness, Honduras had
the highest number of land and
environmental defenders killed per capita in
the world. The coordinator of the Black
Fraternal Organization of Honduras suffered
an attempted attack in September and three
people from the Guapinol community were

The State of the World’s Human Rights

killed. In October, the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights granted
precautionary measures to members of the
Municipal Committee for the Defence of
Common and Public Assets and their
lawyers. In December, the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights declared the state of
Honduras responsible for violation of the
collective rights of a Garifuna community.
The elaboration of a protocol to investigate
attacks against human rights defenders,
ordered by the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights in 2018, remained pending.
At the end of the year, Honduras had not
signed the Escazú Agreement.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In March, the government allowed the use
and sale of the emergency contraceptive pill,
ending 14 years of prohibition. Despite high
levels of child and teenage pregnancies, the
president vetoed the Pregnancy Prevention
Act, aimed at providing comprehensive sex
education. Abortion remained prohibited in
all circumstances.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
LGBTI people continued to face violence and
discrimination, and same-sex marriage
remained prohibited. At the end of the year,
authorities had not adopted a procedure for
the recognition of the gender identity of nonbinary persons, which was ordered by the
Inter-American Court of Human Rights in a
2021 ruling.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
The UN Special Rapporteur on the promotion
and protection of human rights in the context
of climate change highlighted the devastating
effects of prolonged droughts, floods caused
by hurricanes, coastal erosion and sea-level
rise on the poorest communities, particularly
on their livelihoods, which also forced many
to flee the country. He urged Honduran
authorities to adopt prevention, adaptation
and mitigation measures to protect the rights
of these populations.

191

HUNGARY
Hungary
A controversial new law was adopted aiming
to further restrict the rights of teachers and
silence their dissent. Bookshops were fined
for breaching the homophobic and
transphobic “Propaganda Law”. Asylum
seekers were refused access to protection in
the country. Parliament adopted judicial
reforms in a bid to access suspended EU
funds, although systemic deficiencies
undermining the free speech of judges
remained. The government’s commitment to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions fell short
of the EU targets.

BACKGROUND
To regain access to EU funds suspended by
the European Commission and the European
Council, Hungary pledged to adopt and
implement anti-corruption measures, amend
legislation concerning the rights of LGBTI
people, asylum seekers and refugees, restore
academic freedom, and introduce reform to
strengthen the independence of the judiciary.
In response the EU institutions decided to
restore Hungary’s access to parts of the
cohesion fund.
The government prolonged the state of
emergency, using Russia’s ongoing
aggression against Ukraine as a pretext to
circumvent parliamentary decision-making
and uphold its anti-immigration regime.
Hungary came last in the European
Implementation Network’s ranking of EU
countries based on their implementation of
leading judgments issued by the European
Court of Human Rights (ECtHR), with 76% of
judgments from the last 10 years not
implemented.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY AND
ASSOCIATION
Police used tear gas multiple times in April
and May to disperse students protesting
against controversial legislation to further
centralize the public education system and

192

silence teachers voicing dissent. During a
demonstration in May, police arrested and
detained five protesters, four of them minors,
for allegedly attacking police officers.
Parliament adopted legislation dubbed the
“Vengeance Act” in July, further restricting
teachers’ autonomy and silencing their
criticism towards educational policies.
Teachers fired for participating in acts of
civil disobedience in 2022 took the state to
court, seeking to overturn their dismissals
and secure compensation.
Police banned seven protests expressing
solidarity with people living in the Occupied
Palestinian Territories under the pretext of
protecting public safety, without meeting the
legal threshold for the ban.
Despite severe criticism from the Council of
Europe and NGOs, new legislation was
adopted in December aiming to further
silence critical voices and deter organizations
from public participation in Hungary. The
vaguely worded law created a new authority
and tasked it with investigating organizations
and individuals considered a “threat to
national sovereignty”.

DISCRIMINATION
LGBTI PEOPLE
Fifteen EU member states and the European
Parliament intervened through the Court of
Justice of the European Union (CJEU) to
support LGBTI rights in an ongoing
infringement procedure against the so-called
“Propaganda Law” adopted in 2021. This law
banned the “promotion and portrayal of
homosexuality and gender change” in linear
media services. The court case was pending
at the end of 2023.
Authorities began to implement sanctions
under the propaganda law by issuing fines to
bookshops that displayed books depicting
homosexuality in their youth literature
sections and failed to sell them in closed
packaging. One company appealed against
the decision; the case was pending at the
end of 2023.
In June, the ECtHR found that Hungary had
violated the rights of transgender people by
failing to provide an adequate procedure for

The State of the World’s Human Rights

legal gender recognition. The judgment
related to a case that preceded the banning
of legal gender recognition in 2020.
The Media Council refused to allow a TV
commercial for the annual Budapest Pride
festival and march on the grounds that it
would “propagate homosexuality”. The
organizers appealed against the decision; the
case was pending at the end of 2023.
In July, a rainbow-coloured bench
inaugurated to celebrate Budapest Pride was
vandalized several times by football club
supporters and far-right activists. The
perpetrators graffitied “Stop LGBTQ” at the
scene, referring to the government’s ongoing
homophobic and transphobic campaign. A
police investigation regarding the hate
incident was pending at the end of 2023.
WOMEN
In its periodic review of Hungary, the CEDAW
Committee raised serious concerns about
reproductive rights in the country,
highlighting the limited access to safe and
legal abortions and the government’s
reinforcement of gender stereotypes.
Hungary still had not ratified the Council of
Europe Convention on preventing and
combating violence against women and
domestic violence (Istanbul Convention),
which it signed in 2014.
The 2023 Gender Equality Index, published
by the European Institute of Gender Equality,
ranked Hungary 26th out of the 27 EU
member states based on its overall
performance, and placed it last in the power
domain.
ROMA
Far-right groups organized a series of protests
in Roma neighbourhoods to intimidate Roma
people. Police did not put in place adequate
measures to protect Roma people from
harassment and threats. Racism and
discrimination against Roma people in
employment, housing and education
persisted.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The Council of Europe adopted an interim
resolution exhorting Hungary to terminate
and provide remedy for collective expulsions

The State of the World’s Human Rights

to Serbia. Summary returns of refugees and
migrants continued throughout 2023,
reaching 100,108 cases by the end of
December.
In June, the CJEU ruled that Hungary had
violated EU rules by restricting asylum
seekers’ access to protection in its territory or
at its borders. The government continued to
uphold a system introduced in 2020
restricting people’s ability to claim asylum in
Hungary; this was possible only if a so-called
“letter of intention” was first filed and
accepted at the Hungarian embassies in
Belgrade or Kyiv. By the end of 2023, access
to submit asylum applications under this
system had been granted in only 16 cases.
The limitations did not apply to Ukrainian
refugees, 40,605 of whom had been granted
temporary protection since Russia’s invasion
of Ukraine in 2022.
The ECtHR delivered six judgments ruling
that Hungary had violated the rights of
refugees and migrants by arbitrarily detaining
them and using excessive force against
people at the border.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
The Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe issued an interim resolution in March
condemning Hungary for still not
implementing the Baka judgment of 2016 to
guarantee freedom of expression for judges
and counter the chilling effect among them of
restricting this freedom.
In May, Hungary adopted significant judicial
reforms in order to access suspended EU
funds. The reforms strengthened judicial
independence and limited the formerly
excessive powers of the National Office for
the Judiciary, the administrative body of the
justice system. However, an assessment by
NGOs found that EU requirements had still
not been fully addressed.
Government officials and pro-government
media continued to discredit judges on the
National Judicial Council for voicing criticism
of government policies that weakened the
independence of the judiciary.

193

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
The Climate Change Performance Index
found that Hungary had committed to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions by 50% by 2030,
falling short of the EU target of 55% or more.
People in several cities protested at their
local governments against the opening of
factories by China-based battery
manufacturers without thorough
environmental impact studies having been
conducted.
Following a government decree in
September, companies violating
environmental requirements through
industrial pollution were exempted from
sanctions as long as they signed a contract
pledging to refrain from further breaches.

INDIA
Republic of India
National financial and investigation
agencies were weaponized against civil
society, human rights defenders, activists,
journalists and critics, further shrinking
civic space. Government officials, political
leaders, and supporters of the Bharatiya
Janata Party (BJP) – the ruling political
party at the federal level – advocated hatred
and violence against religious minorities
with impunity, particularly Muslims,
marking a rise in hate crimes. Punitive
demolitions of largely Muslim properties –
including homes, businesses and places of
worship – resulting in mass forced evictions
after episodes of communal violence, were
commonplace and went unpunished. India
continued to impose arbitrary and blanket
internet restrictions including internet
shutdowns. The government withheld the
Twitter (now known as X) accounts of
journalists and civil society organizations
without due process. Dalits, Adivasis and
other marginalized groups continued to face
violence and entrenched discrimination,
with women and girls facing specific
attacks on their right to bodily autonomy.
Despite a formal ban on manual

194

scavenging, more than 300 people had died
cleaning sewers and septic tanks since
2018.

BACKGROUND
In September, India hosted the 18th G20
Heads of State and Government summit in
the capital, New Delhi. In March, India
engaged with the UN Human Rights Council
UPR and accepted 221 out of 339
recommendations, including those to
eliminate caste discrimination, guarantee the
right to freedom of expression, and to protect
the rights of religious minorities. It noted
recommendations to repeal, amend or bring
the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act
(FCRA), the Unlawful Activities (Prevention)
Act (UAPA) and the laws on sedition and
criminal defamation in line with international
human rights standards. In November, India
also underwent the fourth mutual evaluation
of laws and regulations on anti-money
laundering and countering financing of
terrorism by the Financial Action Task Force
whose recommendations have been exploited
by the government to target human rights
defenders, activists, and government critics.
On 17 October, the Supreme Court failed to
grant legal recognition to same-sex marriage
and left it to the parliament to formulate
necessary legislation.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
On 21 December, the Indian parliament
passed the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhita, a bill which seeks to reintroduce the
sedition law that had been arbitrarily used to
suppress government critics and increases
the possible punishment for sedition from
seven years to life imprisonment. The
Supreme Court had temporarily suspended
the sedition law in 2022.
On 6 April, the government published the
draconian Information Technology
(Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media
Ethics Code) Rules, 2023, expanding its
control over online content. The Rules
authorize a “fact check unit of the central
government” to identify online content “in

The State of the World’s Human Rights

respect of any business of the Central
Government” as “fake or false or
misleading”. Online intermediaries, including
social media companies and internet service
providers, will be required to take down any
such content. Failure to remove content may
result in liability for any third-party
information hosted on their platform.
On 18 March, the authorities imposed a
blanket internet shutdown in Punjab state; 27
million people lost access to the internet for
at least five days. From 3 May, Manipur state
witnessed long periods of internet shutdowns,
with the authorities allowing intermittent
access for short periods. According to digital
rights organization Access Now, India had
imposed 84 internet shutdowns in 2022, the
highest number in the world for five years in
a row.
In April, comedian Yash Rathi and rappers
Raj Mungase and Umesh Khade were
investigated by the Uttarakhand police and
Maharashtra police respectively for alleged
defamation and promotion of enmity between
different groups. The accusations against
them included allegedly making
objectionable remarks against Lord Ram in a
comedy set and singing songs highlighting
the prevailing poverty and corruption in India.
On 31 October, opposition leaders and
journalists were notified they were on Apple’s
global threat list and that their iPhones may
have been targeted by “state-sponsored
attackers”.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The authorities weaponized the central
financial and investigation agencies to crack
down on civil society organizations and
human rights defenders using tax, money
laundering, foreign contribution and antiterror laws. On 14 February, tax authorities
carried out coordinated raids – presented as
“surveys” – at the Delhi and Mumbai offices
of the BBC media organization weeks after it
broadcast a documentary critical of the prime
minister Narendra Modi. The Ministry of
Home Affairs revoked the FCRA licence of
the Centre for Policy Research in February,
and in June suspended for six months the
licence of the Centre for Equity Studies, a

The State of the World’s Human Rights

non-profit organization run by renowned
human rights activist Harsh Mander,
preventing the organizations and activists
from accessing essential funds. On 20
March, the Ministry of Home Affairs
recommended an enquiry by the Central
Bureau of Investigation against Aman
Biradari, another organization run by Harsh
Mander. In July and September, the Income
Tax authorities removed the tax exemption
status of the Centre for Policy Research,
Oxfam India and CARE India.
JOURNALISTS
Restrictions were placed on human rights
defenders, activists and journalists in digital
spaces. On 20 March, authorities blocked the
Twitter (now known as X) accounts of leading
Punjab-based journalists, political leaders
and members of the Punjabi diaspora as the
authorities launched an operation to search
for Amritpal Singh, leader of the organization
Waris Punjab De. In June, Wall Street Journal
journalist Sabrina Siddiqui faced online
abuse from political leaders and BJP
supporters for questioning the prime minister
Narendra Modi about the deteriorating
human rights situation of religious minorities
in India during his visit to the USA. Her
Muslim and Pakistani heritage was targeted
by online trolls.
On 3 October, the Special Cell of the Delhi
police raided the homes of at least 46
journalists associated with the media
organization NewsClick under the UAPA –
India’s primary counterterrorism law – for
allegedly raising funds for terrorist acts,
promoting enmity between different groups
and criminal conspiracy under the Indian
Penal Code, among other accusations.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Eight human rights activists continued to be
detained without trial in Maharashtra state
under the UAPA. They were academics
Shoma Sen and Hany Babu; poet Sudhir
Dhawale; lawyer Surendra Gadling; civil rights
activist Rona Wilson; and three members of
the cultural group Kabir Kala Manch:
Ramesh Gaichor, Jyoti Jagtap and Sagar
Gorkhe. They were arrested between 2018

195

and 2020 by the National Investigation
Agency, India’s main counter-terror agency,
for their alleged involvement in violence
during the Bhima Koregaon celebrations near
the city of Pune in 2018.
At least seven Muslim students, councillors
and human rights activists continued to be
detained without trial since 2020 under the
UAPA for allegedly orchestrating religious
violence in Delhi in February 2020 that killed
at least 53 people, mostly Muslims.
Academic and human rights activist GN
Saibaba continued to be imprisoned since
2017 despite his deteriorating health
condition.
On 28 May, Delhi Police arrested women
wrestlers and their supporters for organizing
a march towards the new parliament
building. They were demanding the arrest of
the head of the Wrestling Federation of India,
who was accused of sexually harassing the
wrestlers.
On 3 October, the Special Cell of Delhi
police arrested Prabir Purkayastha, founder
of NewsClick, and its head of human
resources, Amit Chakraborty, under the
UAPA for allegedly raising funds for terrorist
acts. They remained in detention.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Advocacy of hatred against Muslims
continued to proliferate. According to
Hindutva Watch, a USA-based research
organization, 255 incidents of advocacy of
hatred and violence targeting Muslims were
recorded in the first six months of 2023. In
an emblematic case, on 22 September, a
current Hindu MP used demeaning slurs
based on religious identity against a Muslim
MP. He later apologized and was issued with
a warning.
WOMEN AND GIRLS
Attacks on the right to freedom of religion
particularly affected and further marginalized
Muslim women and girls.
In a welcome step, on 15 June the new
Karnataka state government announced the
decision to repeal the draconian and
discriminatory Karnataka Protection of Right
to Freedom of Religion Ordinance, 2022,

196

popularly known as the “anti-conversion
law”, which contains undue restrictions on
conversions, including for the purpose of
marriage. However, the ban on wearing a
hijab in schools and colleges in the state of
Karnataka continued to remain in place,
hindering the meaningful participation of
women and girls in Indian society and
impacting their access to education.
On 23 January, the Assam state government
announced a crackdown on people who had
“participated in child marriage” in the
previous seven years, leading to mass arrests
of over 3,000 people, mostly Muslims. At
least four women died by suicide under the
mounting pressure of the crackdown. Women
from socially and economically
disadvantaged communities also drew back
from public health facilities, fearing arrests of
their family members, thereby putting their
health at further risk.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
Ethnic violence continued in Manipur state as
state and national authorities failed to protect
ethnic minorities from violence and
displacement. The tribal and predominantly
Christian Kuki community faced the brunt of
violence from the majority Meitei community.
More than 200 people were killed, of whom
roughly two thirds were Kukis. More than
50,000 people were displaced.
On 31 July, a Hindu officer of the Railway
Protection Guard shot dead four people
travelling to Mumbai; three were Muslims.
In August, communal violence broke out in
Nuh town, Haryana state, after a rally
organized by Hindu nationalist groups
Bajrang Dal and Vishwa Hindu Parishad
passed through Muslim majority areas of
Nuh. The violence left seven dead and at
least 200 people injured.
Lynchings continued with impunity.
According to media reports, between January
and December at least 32 Muslim men and
one woman were killed by vigilantes and
radical Hindu groups in the states of Assam,
Bihar, Delhi, Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and West
Bengal.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
FORCED EVICTIONS
Ahead of the 18th G20 summit, multiple
authorities demolished informal settlements
in different parts of Delhi, allegedly to
“beautify” the city, stop encroachments onto
other land and conserve the environment.
According to media reports, between
February and April at least 1,425 properties
were demolished in the Mehrauli,
Tughlaqabad, Moolchand Basti and Yamuna
floodplains area of the city, resulting in the
forced evictions of over 260,800 people.
In August, the railway authorities
demolished at least 90 homes in Nai Basti, a
predominantly Muslim neighbourhood in
Mathura city in Uttar Pradesh. It was alleged
that they had encroached on public land.
The homes were destroyed without providing
reasonable notice or alternative sites for
resettlement, amounting to forced eviction.
Following the communal violence in Nuh,
the Haryana state authorities demolished at
least 300 properties, mostly belonging to
Muslims. The Punjab and Haryana High
Court ordered a halt to further demolitions
and raised concerns about the lack of legal
process and “ethnic cleansing” being
conducted by the state government.

DISCRIMINATION
HATE CRIMES BASED ON CASTE
Hate crimes, including violence against
members of scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes, were committed with impunity. More
than 50,000 suspected crimes against
members of scheduled castes and more than
8,000 crimes against Adivasis, India’s
Indigenous People, were reported in the
latest figures from the National Crime Record
Bureau. While the members of scheduled
castes and scheduled tribes constituted 24%
of the total population, they accounted for
32% of the prison population in 2021.
Despite a formal ban on manual scavenging
in India, between 2018 and 2023, 339
people died while cleaning sewers and septic
tanks, with nine such deaths officially
recorded as of June. This was primarily due

The State of the World’s Human Rights

to lack of implementation of the Employment
of Manual Scavengers and Construction of
Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act 1993 which
prohibits compelling anyone to practise
manual scavenging.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Throughout the year, media reported that
Adivasi women faced sexual violence from
members of dominant castes, often with
complete impunity. In May, two Indigenous
Kuki women were stripped naked and
paraded by a mob of men belonging to the
dominant Meitei community in Manipur, after
which one of them was raped. A First
Information Report was filed with police two
months later, after a video of the incident
surfaced on social media, leading to public
outrage.
In September, designated tailors at a school
in Uttarakhand state, attended by over 250
Adivasi students, sexually assaulted more
than 100 Adivasi girls. No arrests had been
made by the end of the year.
LAND RIGHTS
Contradicting a 1996 Supreme Court
judgment, on 4 August, the parliament
passed the Forest Conservation
(Amendment) Act exempting private and
deemed forests traditionally held by
Indigenous communities from the 1980
Forest (Conservation) Act. The amendments
exempted private companies from requiring
prior approval from the government for
deforesting the land and setting up
industries.

JAMMU AND KASHMIR
In a positive step, on 18 November, the High
Court of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh
granted bail to journalist Fahad Shah who
had been in detention since February 2022
under the UAPA in retaliation for his
legitimate journalism. On 9 November and 11
December respectively, the Court also
quashed the detention orders of journalist
Sajad Gul and human rights defender Asif
Sultan under the Jammu and Kashmir Public

197

Safety Act, legislation that allows the
authorities to administratively detain an
individual without charge or trial. They had
been in detention since January 2022 and
August 2018 respectively. However, human
rights defender Khurram Parvez continued to
be detained since 2021 under the Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Act.
On 19 August, the Indian authorities
blocked access to Fahad Shah’s online news
outlet, The Kashmir Walla, and its associated
social media accounts on Facebook and X
(formerly Twitter).
On 4 and 5 February, the district municipal
corporations and Union Territory revenue
authorities demolished the homes and
properties of residents in at least four districts
– Srinagar, Budgam, Anantnag and
Baramulla – in Jammu and Kashmir.
On 11 December, the Supreme Court of
India upheld the constitutional validity of the
abrogation of Article 370 of the Constitution
of India by the government on 5 August
2019. Article 370 guaranteed far-reaching
powers to the Union Territory of Jammu and
Kashmir on a wide range of issues, with the
exception of foreign affairs, defence and
communication. The Court also
recommended the creation of an
independent truth and reconciliation
commission to investigate human rights
violations committed by state and non-state
actors in the region and ordered the Indian
government to hold legislative assembly
elections in the Union Territory by September
2024.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
The government lacked adequate disaster
preparedness policies and failed to effectively
respond to floods and air pollution
exacerbated by climate change. The
Himalayan region remained vulnerable to
intense floods which killed at least 72 people
in August.
The authorities failed to provide adequate
support to marginalized communities
affected by heatwaves, leaving at least 96
people dead in the states of Uttar Pradesh
and Bihar.

198

In November, the air quality index in Delhi
hit 500, which is 100 times the limit deemed
to be healthy by the WHO.

INDONESIA
Republic of Indonesia
Peaceful demonstrators were arrested and
excessive force was used to break up
protests. Military operations in Papua
resulted in unlawful killings and torture and
other ill-treatment. Pro-independence
activists were imprisoned. Torture and other
ill-treatment by security forces of criminal
suspects was commonplace, in some cases
resulting in deaths. Non-state armed groups
in Papua were also responsible for unlawful
killings. The government failed to conduct
meaningful consultations with populations
affected by controversial development
projects. Indonesia remained heavily reliant
on coal for energy generation and plans to
phase out fossil fuels were inadequate.

BACKGROUND
Tensions in Papua increased following the
taking hostage in February of a pilot, a New
Zealand national, by members of the National
Liberation Army of Free Papua Organization
(TPNPB-OPM) at Paro Airport in the remote
highlands of Nduga regency, Papua
Pegunungan province. In response the
Indonesian military raised the operational
status in Nduga to “combat alert” and
deployed additional troops to the area, raising
fears for the safety of civilians there and in
surrounding areas.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Security forces arrested peaceful
demonstrators and used excessive force to
disperse protests, often resulting in injuries.
On 5 August, police arrested 18 people who
were resting in West Sumatra Grand Mosque
in the provincial capital Padang during
protests against plans for an oil and
petrochemical refinery in Nagari Air Bangis
village in Barat regency. Police removed other

The State of the World’s Human Rights

protesters from the building, some of whom
were praying at the time, including women
who were dragged from the mosque. At least
five journalists who were live-streaming or
reporting on the event were physically
assaulted and threatened by police officers.
All of those arrested, including community
leaders and activists, students and lawyers,
were subsequently released without charge.
These events followed a six-day protest in
Nagari Air Bangis by residents concerned
about the risk posed by the construction of
the refinery to their livelihoods and the local
environment.
On 14 August, security forces arrested
seven people and used tear gas to disperse
protesters who were blocking a road in the
city of Bandung, West Java, to protest against
the planned eviction of around 300 residents
of Dago Elos, a suburb of the city. Those
arrested included Dago Elos residents and a
lawyer who was supporting them in the land
dispute. All were released on 16 August but
three were charged with committing violent
acts. Several people were reportedly injured
as a result of excessive use of force by the
police.1

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Authorities continued to prosecute people for
crimes against the security of the state for
exercising their right to freedom of
expression, including those calling for
independence of Papua. At least three
Papuan activists were imprisoned during the
year for expressing their opinions.
On 8 August, Jayapura District Court found
Yoseph Ernesto Matuan, Devio Tekege and
Ambrosius Fransiskus Elopere guilty of
treason under Articles 55 and 106 of the
Criminal Code and sentenced them to 10
months’ imprisonment each. The three
students were arrested in November 2022
while participating in a vigil at Jayapura
University of Technology and Science to
commemorate the 21st anniversary of the
abduction and killing of pro-independence
leader Theys Eluay, at which the Morning
Star flag, a symbol of Papuan independence,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

was raised. All three were released in
September having served their sentences.2

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
At least 26 incidents resulting in unlawful
killings by security forces were reported in
Papua, involving a total of 58 victims.
In September, security forces shot and
killed five Indigenous Papuans in Dekai, the
capital of Yahukimo regency, Papua
Pegunungan province. The security forces
claimed that the five, who were aged between
15 and 18, were killed in a firefight with the
TPNPB-OPM. Other sources denied that the
youths were members of the armed group
but rather were returning to their village
having bought food in Dekai. Anyone leaving
Dekai was required to report to a security
post on the outskirts of the city and if they
failed to do so they were automatically
considered to be members of the TPNPBOPM. The authorities had not initiated
investigations into the alleged killings by the
end of the year.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Security forces subjected detainees to torture
and other ill-treatment to extract information
or confessions.
Torture and other ill-treatment remained
commonplace in Papua, where incidents of
arbitrary detention and torture also occurred
in the context of military operations in and
around Nduga regency. On 6 April, the
military detained and tortured six Indigenous
Papuans from Kwiyawagi village in Lanny
Jaya regency, Papua Pegunungan province.
The six, who included four boys, were
transported by helicopter to the military
headquarters in Timika, where 17-year-old
Wity Unue died, reportedly as a result of
injuries sustained from torture. The five
others were released without charge on 20
April, but were reported to be in poor health.
No one had been brought to justice by the
end of the year.
In September, eight members of the
narcotics division of Jakarta Metropolitan
Police were named as suspects in the
beating to death of a suspected drug dealer

199

during interrogation in July. None of the eight
had been charged by the end of the year.
In August, the body of Imam Masykur was
found more than three weeks after he was
abducted and tortured by three soldiers from
the Presidential Security Force and the
Indonesian military. According to the Asian
Human Rights Commission, the three
detained the 25-year-old in the capital,
Jakarta, after accusing him of selling illegal
drugs and demanded a ransom for his
release. Imam Masykur’s body was found in
a reservoir in West Java. In December, the
three perpetrators were sentenced to life
imprisonment and dismissed from the
military.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Eleven incidents resulting in the unlawful
killings of 24 victims by the TPNPB-OPM in
Papua were documented during the year.
On 28 August, a spokesperson for the
armed group claimed that it had killed
Michelle Kurisi Doga in Kolawa, Lanny Jaya
regency, Papua Pegunungan province. At the
time of her death, Michelle Kurisi Doga was
travelling to gather data on displacement
resulting from military operations in Nduga,
but according to the spokesman they
suspected her of being a member of military
intelligence.3
The New Zealand national taken hostage by
the TPNPB-OPM in February had not been
released by the end of the year.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
The government failed to carry out
meaningful consultations and effective
human rights due diligence processes before
allowing work to start on the Rempang EcoCity project, a multibillion-dollar industrial
and tourism development project on
Rempang Island. The project involves the
relocation of around 7,500 residents from 16
villages primarily inhabited by the Tempatan
Indigenous Peoples that would result in loss
of access to their ancestral lands. The
national development project met with strong
opposition from Tempatan Peoples and other

200

local communities. Consultations on the
project were held with affected communities
in August, but security at some of the
meetings was reportedly heavy and observers
described the meetings as a one-way
dissemination of information from the
government and the company to residents.
A series of protests against the acquisition
of land for the Rempang Eco-City project
were held in August and September,
culminating in clashes with security forces on
7 September during which some protesters
threw stones and water bottles and security
forces responded with water cannon, tear gas
and rubber bullets. At least 20 protesters
were injured and approximately 25 pupils
from two schools located near the site of the
protests required hospital treatment from the
effects of tear gas. Following the events of 7
September, new joint police/military security
posts were established on the island.
According to the local branch of the NGO
Legal Aid Institute, at least 35 people were
charged with using or threatening to use
violence against officials carrying out their
duties, which carries a maximum prison
sentence of one year and four months.4

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Although Indonesia generated an increasing
amount of its electricity from renewables, it
remained heavily reliant on coal for electricity
generation. Coal was also Indonesia’s biggest
export product. Plans to phase out the use of
fossil fuels in energy production, set out in
Presidential Regulation No. 112 of 2022 on
the Acceleration of Renewable Energy
Development for Power Supply, were
inadequate because, among other factors,
although the regulation banned new coalfired energy plants, it permits the
development of those already planned. As
such, the government proceeded with a
planned 35 thousand-megawatt power
generation project, agreed in 2015, involving
the construction of 109 mainly coal-fired
power plants across the country.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

1. “Indonesia: The Indonesian people have not yet gained freedom from
state violence”, 16 August (Indonesian only)
2. “Indonesia: Release three Papuan students from treason charge”, 8
August (Indonesian only)
3. “Indonesia: Investigate the perpetrators of the murder of Michelle
Kurisi and armed violence against civilians in Papua”, 30 August
(Indonesian only)
4. “Indonesia: Do not force Batam residents to accept national strategic
project”, 8 September (Indonesian only)

IRAN
Islamic Republic of Iran
In the aftermath of the 2022 “Woman Life
Freedom” uprising, authorities further
suppressed the rights to freedom of
expression, association and peaceful
assembly, and intensified their crackdown
on women and girls defying compulsory
veiling laws. Security forces crushed
protests using unlawful force and mass
arrests. Thousands were subjected to
interrogation, arbitrary detention, unjust
prosecution, and imprisonment for
peacefully exercising their human rights.
Enforced disappearances, and torture and
other ill-treatment were widespread and
systematic. Women and girls, LGBTI
people, and ethnic and religious minorities
were subjected to systemic discrimination
and violence. Cruel and inhuman
punishments, including flogging, were
imposed and implemented. The use of the
death penalty as a tool of political
repression intensified and executions
increased. Trials remained systematically
unfair. Systemic impunity prevailed for past
and ongoing crimes against humanity
relating to prison massacres in 1988 and
other crimes under international law.

BACKGROUND
In March, the UN Human Rights Council
renewed the mandate of the Special
Rapporteur on Iran. In his February report,
he pointed to the “possible commission of
international crimes, notably the crimes
against humanity of murder, imprisonment,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

enforced disappearances, torture, rape and
sexual violence, and persecution” during the
“Woman Life Freedom” uprising of 2022.
The UN Independent International FactFinding Mission on Iran, and other
independent UN experts and international
human rights monitors, were denied entry to
Iran.
In November, in its concluding observations
on the fourth periodic report on Iran, the UN
Human Rights Committee called on the
authorities to amend or repeal compulsory
veiling laws and to disband the morality
police. It also expressed concern about
impunity for the pattern of lethal force used
during largely peaceful protests, and called
on authorities to establish impartial and
independent investigations into killings,
torture and other human rights violations
during successive protests to ensure that
perpetrators are brought to justice and
victims receive reparation.
In May, unjustly imprisoned Belgian national
Olivier Vandecasteele was released and
allowed to leave Iran under a Belgium/Iran
deal that enabled the premature release and
return to Iran of Iranian intelligence agent
Assadollah Asadi, who was serving a 20-year
sentence in Belgium for a thwarted bomb
attack against Iranian dissidents in France.
The deal contributed to ongoing impunity for
the commission of hostage-taking and other
crimes under international law by the Iranian
authorities (see Belgium entry).1
Iran continued to provide military support to
government forces in the armed conflict in
Syria (see Syria entry).
Iran continued to provide drones to Russia,
which were used to target and destroy civilian
infrastructure in Ukraine, and transferred the
technology and manufacturing expertise to
allow Russia to manufacture the same
drones.
Iran denied involvement in or prior
knowledge of the 7 October attack on Israel
by Hamas and other Palestinian armed
groups.

201

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
Authorities censored media, jammed satellite
television channels, and continued to block
and/or filter mobile apps and social media
platforms, including Facebook, Google Play,
Instagram, Signal, Telegram, WhatsApp, X
(formerly Twitter) and YouTube.
The Internet User Protection Bill, which
would violate people’s right to privacy and
further erode online freedoms and access to
the global internet, remained pending before
parliament.
Internet and mobile phone networks were
disrupted during and ahead of expected
protests.
The authorities resorted to repressive tactics
to prevent mass nationwide protests, while
security forces crushed smaller local protests
using unlawful force and mass arrests.
In May, security forces used unlawful force
against villagers protesting against a house
demolition in Gojag village, Hormozgan
province, resulting in injuries.
During and in advance of the anniversary of
the “Woman Life Freedom” uprising in
September, authorities suppressed protests
and memorials, including by arbitrarily
arresting relatives of victims and forcing
thousands of university students to sign
undertakings not to protest.2
Attacks on weekly Friday protests in
Zahedan city in Sistan and Baluchestan
province peaked on 20 October as security
forces unlawfully used tear gas, shotguns and
water cannons against thousands of
protesters and worshippers, including
children, and carried out mass arbitrary
arrests.3
Thousands of people, including children,
were subjected to abusive interrogations,
arbitrary detention, unjust prosecution, and
suspension or expulsion from education or
employment for peacefully exercising their
human rights. Victims included protesters,
women removing mandatory headscarves in
public, journalists, actors and musicians,
writers and academics, university students,
LGBTI individuals, and human rights
defenders, including women’s rights activists,

202

anti-death penalty campaigners, lawyers, and
families seeking truth and justice for victims
of unlawful killings.
The authorities continued to ban
independent political parties, civil society
organizations and trade unions, and
subjected workers and labour rights activists
to reprisals for striking and holding peaceful
gatherings, including on International
Workers’ Day.

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND UNFAIR
TRIALS
Trials were systematically unfair, resulting in
thousands of people being arbitrarily
detained. Systematic due process violations
included denial of the right to a lawyer from
the time of arrest, admission of torturetainted “confessions” as evidence, and
summary trials, resulting in imprisonment as
well as sentences of flogging and death.
The judiciary played a central role in
entrenching impunity for torture, enforced
disappearances and other human rights
violations, as it lacked independence and
included senior officials who must
themselves be investigated for crimes under
international law.
Authorities sought to further undermine the
independence of the Iranian Bar Association
through legislative changes and other
repressive measures.
Impunity prevailed for the ongoing practice
of arbitrarily detaining foreign and dual
nationals for leverage, which, in some cases,
constituted the crime of hostage-taking.
The arbitrary house arrest of dissidents
Mehdi Karroubi, Mir Hossein Mousavi and
Zahra Rahnavard entered its 13th year.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
AND TORTURE AND OTHER ILLTREATMENT
Authorities routinely subjected detainees to
enforced disappearance and incommunicado
detention, frequently in facilities controlled by
the Ministry of Intelligence, the Revolutionary
Guards and various bodies of Iran’s police.4
Torture and other ill-treatment were
widespread and systematic, including

The State of the World’s Human Rights

beatings, floggings, electric shocks, mock
executions, denial of food and water, and
prolonged solitary confinement. State
television aired torture-tainted “confessions”.
Prisoners were subjected to cruel and
inhuman conditions, including extreme
overcrowding, unsanitary conditions, poor
ventilation, infestation with mice or insects,
and poor or no access to bedding, toilet and
washing facilities.
Prison officials and prosecution authorities
often deliberately denied prisoners adequate
healthcare, including for torture-related
injuries. Suspicious deaths in custody amid
credible reports of torture and other illtreatment, including beatings and denial of
healthcare, went unaddressed and
unpunished. Among those who died in
suspicious circumstances were Ebrahim Rigi
and Javad Rouhi, who had been detained in
relation to the 2022 uprising.
The Islamic Penal Code retained
punishments amounting to torture and other
ill-treatment, including flogging, blinding,
amputation, crucifixion and stoning.
Courts issued at least 188 flogging
sentences, and at least nine were
implemented; two amputation sentences
were implemented; and one blinding
sentence was upheld by the Supreme Court,
according to the Abdorrahman Boroumand
Center for Human Rights in Iran.

DISCRIMINATION AND VIOLENCE
AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
The authorities continued to treat women as
second-class citizens, including in relation to
marriage, divorce, child custody,
employment, inheritance and political office.
The legal age of marriage for girls remained
at 13, and fathers could obtain judicial
permission to subject their daughters to
forced marriage at a younger age.
Authorities intensified their nationwide
crackdown on women and girls who defied
compulsory veiling, introducing policies that
severely violated their social, economic,
cultural, civil and political rights and
restricted their freedom of movement.5
Punitive policies included: sending more than

The State of the World’s Human Rights

1 million women SMS warnings threatening
confiscation of their vehicles; immobilizing
women’s cars; denying women access to
employment, education, healthcare, banking
services and/or public transport; and
referring women to the judiciary, which
imposed imprisonment, fines and degrading
punishments, such as washing corpses.
Based on official announcements, over 1,800
businesses were forcibly closed for not
enforcing compulsory veiling.
“Morality” policing returned, resulting in
intensified harassment and violence against
women and girls in public.
In December, the Expediency Council
intervened to approve the draconian Bill to
Support the Family by Promoting the Culture
of Chastity and Hijab, and sent it for final
approval to the Guardian Council, which
returned the bill to parliament again for
further amendments. The bill provides for up
to 10 years’ imprisonment for anyone who
defies compulsory veiling, and criminalizes
non-state actors, including businesses, who
refuse to enforce compulsory veiling.
On 28 October, 16-year-old Armita
Garawand died after 28 days in a coma amid
reports that an enforcer of compulsory veiling
laws assaulted her. Authorities arrested a
journalist investigating the incident,
circulated propaganda videos absolving
themselves of responsibility, and subjected
those attending her commemorations to
arbitrary detention, beatings and/or other
forms of harassment.
Between January and April, thousands of
schoolgirls were poisoned and hospitalized as
a result of chemical attacks deliberately
targeting girls’ schools nationwide in what
appeared to be a coordinated campaign to
punish schoolgirls for removing their
mandatory hijabs during the 2022 uprising.
The authorities subjected parents,
schoolgirls, teachers, journalists and others to
violence, intimidation and arbitrary arrest for
criticizing the authorities’ failure to stop the
attacks and for seeking truth and
accountability.
In April, parliament approved the general
principles of the bill Preventing Women from

203

Harm and Improving Their Security Against
Misbehaviour. Some of its provisions were
referred for further examination to relevant
parliamentary committees. The bill had been
introduced over a decade ago to address
violence against women, but the text was
watered down to remove mentions of
“violence”. It failed to define domestic
violence as an offence, criminalize marital
rape and child marriage, and ensure men
who murder their wives or daughters face
proportionate punishments.
Authorities failed to provide adequate
gender-specific healthcare to women
prisoners.

DISCRIMINATION
ETHNIC MINORITIES
Ethnic minorities, including Ahwazi Arabs,
Azerbaijani Turks, Baluchis, Kurds and
Turkmen, faced widespread discrimination,
curtailing their access to education,
employment, adequate housing and political
office. Continued under-investment in regions
populated by ethnic minorities exacerbated
poverty and marginalization.
Persian remained the sole language of
instruction in primary and secondary
education, despite repeated calls for
linguistic diversity.
Security forces unlawfully killed with
impunity dozens of unarmed Kurdish crossborder couriers (kulbars) between the
Kurdistan regions of Iran and Iraq, as well as
Baluchi fuel porters (soukhtbar) in Sistan and
Baluchestan province.
RELIGIOUS MINORITIES
Religious minorities, including Baha’is,
Christians, Gonabadi Dervishes, Jews, Sunni
Muslims and Yaresan, suffered discrimination
in law and practice, including in access to
education, employment, child adoption,
political office and places of worship.
Hundreds were subjected to arbitrary
detention, unjust prosecution, and torture
and other ill-treatment for professing or
practising their faith.
People born to parents classified as Muslim
by the authorities risked arbitrary detention,

204

torture or the death penalty for “apostasy” if
they adopted other religions or atheism.
Members of the Baha’i minority were
subjected to widespread and systematic
violations, including through prohibition from
higher education and forcible closure of their
businesses or confiscation of their properties,
as well as mass arbitrary detentions.
Authorities prevented Baha’i burials in a
cemetery they have used for decades in
Tehran and forcibly buried several deceased
Baha’is at the nearby Khavaran mass grave
site, believed to contain the remains of
victims of prison massacres in 1988, without
their families’ prior knowledge and in violation
of Baha’i burial practices.
Authorities raided house churches and
subjected Christian converts to arbitrary
arrest and punishments such as
imprisonment and internal “exile”.
LGBTI PEOPLE
LGBTI people suffered systemic
discrimination and violence. Consensual
same-sex sexual relations remained
criminalized with punishments ranging from
flogging to the death penalty.
State-endorsed “conversion therapies”
amounting to torture or other ill-treatment
remained prevalent, including against
children. Hormone therapy and surgical
procedures, including sterilization, were
mandatory for legal gender recognition.
Gender non-conforming individuals risked
criminalization and denial of access to
education and employment.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The estimated 5 million Afghan nationals in
Iran faced widespread discrimination,
including barriers to education, housing,
employment, healthcare, banking services
and freedom of movement.
State media and some officials railed
against Afghan asylum seekers, fuelling hate
speech and hate crimes against Afghan
nationals in Iran.
In November, authorities announced that
repatriation of “illegal” Afghan migrants had
started in August and that, since then,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

450,000 had “voluntarily” returned to
Afghanistan.

DEATH PENALTY
Executions increased from 2022 and the
number of drug-related executions almost
doubled.
The death penalty was imposed after grossly
unfair trials and for offences not meeting the
threshold of the “most serious crimes”
involving intentional killing. The offences
included drug trafficking, financial
corruption, vandalism, and vaguely worded
offences such as “enmity against
God” (moharebeh) and “corruption on
earth” (efsad-e fel-arz).
The death penalty was also retained for acts
protected by the rights to privacy and
freedom of expression, religion or belief,
including “insulting the Prophet”, drinking
alcohol, and consensual same-sex sexual
relationships between adults or outside
marriage. Adultery remained punishable by
stoning.
Authorities used the death penalty as a tool
of political repression against protesters,
dissidents and ethnic minorities.6
Two men were executed for “apostasy”
solely for the peaceful exercise of their right
to freedom of religion through social media
activities.
Six young men were arbitrarily executed in
relation to the 2022 uprising after unfair
sham trials based on torture-tainted
“confessions”.
The oppressed Baluchi minority made up a
disproportionate number of those executed.7
Several individuals who were below 18 at
the time of the crime were executed,
including Hamidreza Azari, who was 17 at
the time of his execution. Scores of others
remained on death row.

IMPUNITY
In May, the president announced the
formation of the non-judicial Special
Committee for Examining the Unrest of 2022
amid concerns over the impartiality and
independence of its members. The
committee failed to carry out investigations in

The State of the World’s Human Rights

line with international standards or make its
findings public.
No public official was held accountable for
unlawful killings, torture, enforced
disappearance and other crimes under
international law or grave human rights
violations committed in 2023 or before.
Authorities continued to cover up torture
and other ill-treatment, including rape and
other forms of sexual violence, perpetrated by
state officials against protesters detained
during the 2022 uprising, and pressured
victims to withdraw complaints or face
reprisals. They also subjected families of
victims unlawfully killed during the uprising to
harassment and intimidation, arbitrary
detention, bans on memorial ceremonies,
and destruction of their loved ones’ grave
sites. They continued to deny responsibility
for the 2022 death in custody of Jina/Mahsa
Amini and harassed her family.
Authorities continued to conceal the truth
surrounding the January 2020 missile strike
against Ukraine International Airlines flight
752, which killed 176 people. In April,
following a trial mired in secrecy, a military
court sentenced a commander to 13 years’
imprisonment and nine others to between
one and three years in prison. In August, the
case was sent for appeal to the Supreme
Court.
Impunity prevailed for ongoing crimes
against humanity relating to the extrajudicial
execution and enforced disappearance of
several thousand political dissidents in 1988,
with many of those involved holding top
official positions, including the president.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Environmental experts criticized the
authorities’ failure to address Iran’s
environmental crisis, marked by loss of lakes,
rivers and wetlands; deforestation; air
pollution; water pollution caused by the
discharge of wastewater into urban water
sources; and land subsidence.
Iran maintained high levels of fossil fuel
production and subsidies.

205

1. “Iran/Belgium: Iran must be held accountable for hostage-taking
after overdue release of Olivier Vandecasteele in prisoner swap”, 26
May
2. “Iran: One year after uprising international community must combat
impunity for brutal crackdown”, 13 September
3. “Iran: New wave of brutal attacks against Baluchi protesters and
worshippers”, 26 October
4. “Iran: Further information: Activist forcibly disappeared for over a
year: Ebrahim Babaei”, 14 March
5. “Iran: International community must stand with women and girls
suffering intensifying oppression”, 26 July
6. “Iran: Executions of tortured protesters must trigger a robust reaction
from the international community,” 19 May
7. “Iran: Chilling execution spree with escalating use of death penalty
against persecuted ethnic minorities”, 2 March

IRAQ
Republic of Iraq
Iraqi authorities took no meaningful steps
to bring to justice members of security
forces and state-affiliated militias involved
in the violent crackdown on nationwide
protests in October 2019. Security forces
continued to forcibly disappear men and
boys, and the fate of thousands of Iraqis
who were subjected to
enforced disappearance in previous years
remained unknown. Iraqi authorities
attacked freedom of expression and
prepared new laws to further curb this right.
Authorities intensified their repression of
LGBTI people’s rights. Protection from
gender-based violence remained severely
limited in central Iraq and the Kurdistan
Region of Iraq. The majority of the 1.1
million internally displaced people in Iraq
continued to live in precarious situations
and unable to access basic rights.

BACKGROUND
On 18 December, provincial elections were
held across Iraq, except in the four
governorates in Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KRI), where elections were scheduled for early
2024. The low 41% voter turnout was largely
attributed to apathy and lack of faith in the
authorities.

206

Throughout the year, Türkiye’s Ministry of
National Defence claimed air strikes on
positions held by the Kurdistan Workers Party
(PKK) in the mountains and in the KR-I,
including a drone attack in October on a
refugee camp that hosts over 12,000
refugees, injuring one woman and two
children.
Drought, exacerbated by climate change,
reduced agricultural production.
Contaminated water was linked to cholera
outbreaks across Iraq, and the WHO reported
at least 1,302 cases and at least seven
deaths by mid-November.
In July, the Iraqi government severed
diplomatic relations with Sweden after reports
that an Iraqi immigrant burned a copy of the
Qur’an outside its embassy in Sweden’s
capital Stockholm. In Iraq, followers of Shia
cleric Muqtada al-Sadr attacked the Swedish
embassy in Baghdad. In September, a court
in Baghdad sentenced 18 police officers to
prison terms of between 18 months and
three years for their failure to prevent the
attack.
In October, Iraq’s political parties, leaders of
the Popular Mobilization Units (PMU) and
religious clerics responded to Israel’s
bombardment of Gaza, calling for mass
protests in support of Palestine. By the end of
the year, several of the largest factions of the
PMU, which later came to call themselves
the Islamic Resistance in Iraq, claimed drone
and rocket attacks on US bases in Iraq’s
western governorate of Anbar as well as in
the KR-I.

IMPUNITY
Iraqi authorities took no meaningful steps to
bring to justice members of security forces
and state-affiliated militias involved in the
violent crackdown on the nationwide October
2019 protests (also known as the Tishreen
protests), despite the establishment of
several investigative and fact-finding
committees.1 During the crackdown,
hundreds of people were killed, thousands
were maimed and scores abducted.
Armed actors, including PMU members,
continued to harass and intimidate relatives

The State of the World’s Human Rights

and loved ones of activists who disappeared
or were killed in the context of the October
2019 protests. In an emblematic case, family
members of Sajjad al-Iraqi – an activist who
was forcibly disappeared in September 2020
in Nasiriya and whose fate remained
unknown – said they were subjected to
numerous threats and put under pressure to
drop a court case related to the activist’s
disappearance. The family said that those
making the threats are linked to the
abductors and the PMU.
In April, a letter from the Prime Minister’s
Office to Amnesty International outlined
measures taken by the Fact-Finding
Committee, established in October 2020 and
reactivated in November 2022, to commence
reaching out to representatives of the
Tishreen protesters. The office said the
committee had investigated more than 215
cases obtained from a Baghdad court and
reviewed thousands of medical reports,
victim autopsy forms and reports of forensic
experts. It added that reparations had been
paid to the families of those killed, amounting
to IQD 10 million (about USD 7,650) for each
victim.2 However, the committee were yet to
publish any findings. Activists, protesters and
families of those injured or killed also raised
concerns about accessing reparations,
including the requirement of medical
documents that most of the injured could not
obtain during the protests.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
The fate of thousands of Iraqis who were
forcibly disappeared during the armed
conflict to regain control of territory from the
Islamic State armed group, as well as during
the 2019 nationwide protests, remained
unknown.3 In June, Iraq’s Ministry of Foreign
Affairs responded to a letter from Amnesty
International about the disappearance of at
least 643 men and boys from the governorate
of Anbar since 2016, stating that no proof
had been found of the involvement of
government forces and that no criminal
complaints had been brought by families of
the disappeared against security forces for
the abductions.4

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Iraqi security and intelligence forces,
including the PMU, continued to forcibly
disappear men and boys taken from
checkpoints, homes and streets. Human
rights organizations and activists in a number
of governorates, notably Salah al-Din, Anbar,
Ninewa and Basra, continued to report
instances of enforced disappearances at the
hands of factions of the PMU that had a
presence in these areas.
In April, the UN Committee on Enforced
Disappearances estimated that 250,000 to
1 million individuals had been forcibly
disappeared in Iraq since 1968 and urged
Iraq to criminalize the practice. In response,
on 6 August Iraqi authorities presented their
draft law on missing persons to parliament,
which had the stated aim of helping relatives
learn the fate of their missing family
members and be given access to reparations,
including by setting up a national
commission for the missing. However, the
latest draft seen by Amnesty International
failed to criminalize enforced disappearances
or outline penalties for perpetrators.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Iraqi authorities carried out a series of attacks
on freedom of expression and attempted to
introduce laws and regulations to curb this
right.5
In January, the authorities announced a
campaign to crack down on “indecent
content” online. In mid-February, a judge in
Baghdad’s investigative court specialized in
media and publishing issues, announced that
the courts had already charged 14 people for
publishing “indecent” or “immoral” content
on social media, and sentenced six of them
to prison terms ranging from six months to
two years. All were charged under Article 403
of the Penal Code, which criminalizes
published material that “violates public
integrity or decency”. Between April and
December, an additional 13 people had been
charged. The majority were released on bail
or after charges against them were dropped,
but at least one person was convicted and
sentenced to a prison term of three months
and 10 days.

207

In July, Iraqi authorities reintroduced to
parliament draft laws – the Law on Freedom
of Expression and Peaceful Assembly, and
the Law on Cybercrimes – that, if passed,
would severely curtail the rights to freedom of
expression and peaceful assembly.6
In the KR-I, government critics scheduled
for release remained behind bars after
authorities brought spurious new charges
against them. They included journalists
Sherwan Sherwani and Guhdar Zebari,
imprisoned in the KR-I since October 2020
following a grossly unfair trial. Guhdar Zebari
was informed on 16 August, the day he was
scheduled for release, that he had been
charged with another offence. He remained
in detention at a facility of the Asayish, the
KRG security and intelligence agency, until
his trial on 1 October, when he was
sentenced to a further six months’
imprisonment for possession of an
unlicensed weapon. Sherwan Sherwani was
due to be released on 9 September, but on
20 July, a court sentenced him to an
additional four years in prison on charges
relating to falsifying Guhdar Zebari’s signature
on a petition to the Erbil Adult Reform Prison,
to which the latter confirmed he had
consented. On 1 November, an appeals court
in Erbil reduced Sherwan Sherwani’s
sentence to two years.7

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Authorities escalated their crackdown on the
rights of LGBTI people.
On 9 August, the Iraqi Communications and
Media Commission issued a directive
banning media outlets from using the word
“gender” and requiring the term
“homosexuality” to be replaced with “sexual
deviance” in all published and broadcast
language.8
On 15 August, the Iraqi parliament carried
out the first reading of a law, proposed by the
parliament’s deputy speaker, that would
impose the death penalty for people found to
be in a same-sex sexual relationship, as well
as punitive measures for trans people
seeking gender affirmation treatment. The

208

draft law was withdrawn in September
following local and international outrage.
In the KR-I, on 6 September, the authorities
in Erbil city arrested and detained two wellknown beauty experts for, respectively, crossdressing and posting “indecent” images on
social media, which the prosecution deemed
to be “disrupting the order of society”. They
were released the following week without
charge.
Activists and NGO workers in the KR-I
reported being threatened with arrest
warrants and summoned for questioning in
regard to their work and activism for LGBTI
people’s rights.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
The Iraqi parliament failed to criminalize
domestic violence and to adequately protect
women and girls from gender-based violence.
In April, a court in Baghdad sentenced the
father of Tiba al-Ali to six months’
imprisonment for her murder on 1 February,
leading to protests in Baghdad against the
lenient sentence.9
Authorities took no steps to amend
provisions of Iraq’s Penal Code that allow a
husband to punish his wife, and parents to
discipline their children using corporal
punishment, and provide for a mitigated
sentence for “honour killings”. The Penal
Code also allows rapists to avoid prosecution
by marrying their victim.
Failure by the KRG to bolster stateestablished protection mechanisms and
services seriously undermined the ability of
survivors of domestic violence to flee abuse.
Slow judicial processes and difficult living
conditions in shelters often left women with
little choice but to drop charges against their
abusers, further perpetuating impunity.
In April, Iraqi authorities announced that
Yazidi survivors of violence were required to
file a criminal complaint to access and
receive reparation, as set out in the Yazidi
Survivors Law of 2021, which seriously
undermines survivors’ best interests and
hinders adequate, prompt and effective
reparation.10

The State of the World’s Human Rights

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S
RIGHTS
At the beginning of the year, at least 1.2
million men, women and children remained
internally displaced as a result of the conflict
with Islamic State, with the majority still living
in precarious situations almost six years after
the government declared victory over the
armed group.
In April, Iraqi authorities closed, without
warning or coordination with humanitarian
actors, the last operating camp in Ninewa
governorate in north-west Iraq for those
internally displaced by the conflict with
Islamic State. The only remaining camps
were in areas under KRG control. The closure
of the Ninewa camp left hundreds of families
at risk of secondary displacement without any
plan for those unable to return to their areas
of origin.
Security and intelligence forces operating in
civil status directorates in several
governorates continued to subject hundreds
of families, most of them female-headed, to a
process of blacklisting due to their perceived
affiliation with Islamic State. They prevented
families from accessing civil status
documentation that is essential for accessing
basic rights and left families at risk of arrest
at checkpoints.
By the end of the year, at least 1.1 million
Iraqis remained displaced, of whom 175,000
were in camps and the rest were in situations
of secondary displacement.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In relation to climate change, Iraq continued
to rank among the most climate-vulnerable
and least-prepared countries. Despite this,
actors believed to be part of the PMU
intimidated and, in some cases, abducted
environmental activists and experts. In
February, unidentified armed actors from AlHilla town in Babil governorate abducted an
expert who had frequently raised alarms
about Iraqi marshes drying out; his fate
remained unknown for two weeks. Following
his release, he stated that he had been
tortured and otherwise ill-treated. No

The State of the World’s Human Rights

investigation into the incident or arrests were
made public.
Despite receiving support to develop a
national adaptation plan, the government had
not published anything by the end of the
year.
Iraq announced plans to drill new wells and
increase oil production, contrary to the UN
conclusion that countries must substantially
reduce production to keep global warming to
less than 1.5°C. In October, Iraq reported
record revenues from oil sales since the
beginning of 2023, amounting to over 90% of
its total revenues, but this income did not
lead to any plans to diversify the economy.

RIGHT TO WATER
Despite its natural resources, Iraq has
become one of the most water-stressed
countries in the world. For the second
consecutive year, Iraq’s Ministry of Water
Resources announced that water levels in
Iraq were the lowest ever. Iraqi authorities
continued to attribute the scarcity to dam
building in neighbouring countries. Others,
including UNICEF, attributed the increasing
water scarcity to a range of factors, including
poor water management, and raised
concerns about over-use of non-renewable
water resources.
By September at least 21,798 families
remained displaced across the southern and
central governorates of Iraq due to drought
and water scarcity exacerbated by climate
change, according to the International
Organization for Migration.
1. “Iraq: Four years after Tishreen protests, no justice for state and
militia violence”, 27 September
2. “Iraq: Letter of response from the Government of Iraq to Amnesty
International on 2 April 2023”, 4 May
3. “‘More than a million years of waiting and campaigning’: Families of
the disappeared mark the International Day for the Disappeared in
Beirut”, 30 August
4. “Iraq: Letter of Response from the Government of Iraq to Amnesty
International on 8 June 2023”, 26 June
5. “Iraq: Joint statement: Iraqi authorities must cease chilling
crackdown on free speech”, 3 March
6. “Iraq: Draft laws threaten rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly”, 18 July

209

7. “Iraq/KRI: Further information: Journalists face additional prison
time: Sherwan Sherwani and Guhdar Zebari”, 24 August
8. “Iraq: Authorities must immediately reverse media ban on the terms
‘homosexuality’ and ‘gender’”, 9 August
9. “Iraq: Action must be taken on gender-based violence after murder of
Tiba Ali by her father”, 3 February
10. “Iraq: Statement on the implementation of the Yazidi Survivors Law”,
14 April

IRELAND
Ireland
The crisis in housing availability worsened,
including for asylum seekers. Concerns
emerged about the Data Protection
Commission’s failure to hold Big Tech
companies such as Meta and Google
accountable for violations of the right to
privacy. Criminalization of aspects of sex
work continued to put sex workers at higher
risk of violence.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
The crisis of housing availability and
affordability worsened, and led to record
numbers of people experiencing
homelessness, including children. In
November, 13,514 people were living in
emergency homelessness accommodation.
This included 4,105 children, the largest ever
number and 17% higher than during the
same month in 2022. In its Concluding
Observations published in February, the UN
Committee on the Rights of the Child called
on the government to address the root
causes of homelessness among children,
strengthen measures to phase out
emergency accommodation schemes and
significantly increase the availability of social
housing for families.
By year’s end, a review of housing policy by
the government-established Housing
Commission had still not been published,
and a constitutional referendum on housing
promised by the government had not been
scheduled.

210

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The worsening housing crisis continued to
seriously impact the availability and quality of
accommodation for asylum seekers, with
some new arrivals offered only tents and
sleeping bags.
In October, the Ombudsman for Children
published a Special Report on the Safety and
Welfare of Children in Direct Provision
showing that the government’s “crisis-driven
response” to significantly increased numbers
of people seeking protection affected the
welfare of children living in state-provided
accommodation. Progress on reforms to the
“direct provision” accommodation system for
asylum seekers, as promised in the
government’s 2021 white paper, had “stalled
or regressed”, the report said.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
There were concerns about the Irish Data
Protection Commission’s poor record in
holding Big Tech companies such as Meta
and Google accountable for disregarding the
privacy rights of millions of social media
users in Europe and around the world. In
June, legislation was passed allowing the
commission to deem all its enforcement
procedures confidential, potentially further
shielding Big Tech from scrutiny.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
A report of the government’s review of the
2018 Health (Regulation of Termination of
Pregnancy) Act published in April found
concerning gaps in, and barriers to the
provision of, appropriate abortion care. It
acknowledged the negative impact of
conscience-based refusal by medical
professionals to provide abortion care and
recommended removing criminal liability for
healthcare professionals.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
The 2017 law criminalizing the purchase of
sex and retaining the “brothel-keeping”
offence – preventing sex workers from
working together – had still not been
reviewed, despite a statutory requirement for
a review within three years. Therefore, no

The State of the World’s Human Rights

progress was made in addressing evidence
that the legal framework exposed sex workers
to a higher risk of violence and other abuse.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION
No progress was made in addressing
restrictions imposed by the Electoral Act
1997 (as amended in 2001) on the freedom
of civil society organizations to access
funding for campaigning purposes.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In June, the Environmental Protection
Agency published its greenhouse gas
emissions projections for the period
2022-2040, concluding that the
government’s climate policies and measures,
even if fully implemented, would not achieve
the emissions reduction targets set out in
Ireland’s climate legislation. It found that
almost all sectors – including agriculture,
electricity, transport and industry – were
projected to exceed their national sectoral
emissions ceilings for 2025 and 2030.

ISRAEL AND THE
OCCUPIED
PALESTINIAN
TERRITORIES
State of Israel
In May, Israel launched a five-day offensive
in the occupied and blockaded Gaza Strip,
killing 11 Palestinian civilians. Following a
Hamas-led attack in southern Israel on 7
October during which at least 1,000 people
were killed, of which 36 were children, and
some 245 were taken hostage or captive,
Israel conducted intense military operations
that killed 21,600 Palestinians in Gaza, a
third of them children, and wrecked 60% of
homes. In October, Israel intensified its 16year blockade on Gaza, cutting off all

The State of the World’s Human Rights

supplies, including food, water, electricity,
fuel and medicines, aggravating the
humanitarian catastrophe. Following 7
October, Israeli authorities increased
restrictions on freedom of movement across
the occupied West Bank. Israeli authorities
deepened the apartheid system oppressing
Palestinians in Israel and the Occupied
Palestinian Territories, by implementing
laws and policies of segregation, deprivation
and forced displacement. In Gaza alone,
1.9 million Palestinians were forcibly
displaced due to Israeli offensives, out of a
population of 2.2 million. State-backed
settler violence increased. In the Negev/
Naqab in southern Israel, Israeli forces
continued to demolish Bedouin homes and
whole villages, including one village for the
222nd time. In the West Bank, Israeli
policing operations were the most lethal
since 2005, with 110 Palestinian children
among those killed. Detentions of
Palestinians without charge or trial reached
record levels. Inside Israel, police
sometimes used excessive force and
arbitrary arrests at anti-government
demonstrations, and imposed bans on antiwar protests in Palestinian communities.
LGBTI people continued to face
discrimination in law and practice.

BACKGROUND
Politicians who incited racial hatred, and
proposed to annex Palestinian territory and
forcibly deport Palestinians, were given
military and policing responsibilities by the
Benjamin Netanyahu government. Finance
minister Bezalel Smotrich became governor
of the occupied West Bank in February, and
security minister Itamar Ben-Gvir formed a
volunteer “national guard” in April. Their
Jewish supremacist notions became
mainstream after Hamas’s 7 October attack
(see Palestine entry).
On 25 July, the International Court of
Justice (ICJ) received submissions regarding
the legality of Israel’s occupation of the
Occupied Palestinian Territories (OPT).
From September, the Israeli Supreme Court
heard petitions against an amendment to the

211

Basic Law: The Judiciary. The governmentproposed amendment undermined the
independence of the judiciary and its ability
to preserve the civil rights of Jewish citizens.1
Opposition to the government was manifest
in weekly mass protests, which stopped after
7 October. Benny Gantz’s centrist party
joined the government and emergency war
cabinet on 11 October.
The defence ministry supported the
evacuation of 54 communities in
southern Israel and 43 in northern Israel after
attacks from the Gaza Strip and Lebanon.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
THE GAZA STRIP
The year’s first Israeli offensive against
occupied and blockaded Gaza, from 9 to 13
May, killed 11 Palestinian civilians, including
four children, and destroyed 103 homes. The
initial air strike killed Khalil al-Bahtini, a
senior member of Al-Quds Brigades (the
armed group affiliated with Islamic Jihad), his
wife and young daughter, as well as their
neighbours Dania and Iman Adas.2 Al-Quds
Brigades fired hundreds of indiscriminate
rockets towards Israeli towns (see Palestine
entry).
The second round of hostilities, with its
cataclysmic humanitarian consequences for
Gaza, saw unprecedented numbers of civilian
casualties. On 7 October, amid the firing of
thousands of indiscriminate rockets, fighters
from Palestinian armed groups attacked
southern Israel; at least 1,000 people were
killed, and some 3,300 others injured, while
some 245 were taken hostage and captive
(see Palestine entry). In the following 12
weeks, Israeli forces’ aerial bombings and
ground offensives killed 21,600 Palestinians,
a third of whom were children, according to
Gaza’s Ministry of Health.
Amnesty International’s in-depth field
investigation of the killing of 229 people in
nine unlawful air strikes found that Israel
violated international humanitarian law,
including by failing to take feasible
precautions to spare civilians, or by carrying
out indiscriminate attacks that failed to

212

distinguish between civilians and military
objectives, or by carrying out attacks that
may have been directed against civilian
objects.3
On 19 October, an Israeli air strike
destroyed part of the Saint Porphyrius church
compound in Gaza City, where hundreds of
displaced people were sheltering, killing 18
civilians. Ramez al-Sury’s three children and
10 other relatives including babies were killed
there.4 On 22 October, Israeli forces dropped
US-made Joint Direct Attack Munitions,
killing 19 civilians in the Abu Mu‘eileq family
home in Deir al-Balah in southern Gaza, the
area then designated as safe by Israeli
orders.5
According to OCHA, by the end of the year,
65,000 homes were destroyed, forcibly
displacing 1.9 million Palestinians. In
addition, 76 healthcare facilities, 370
schools, 115 mosques and three churches
were damaged or destroyed.
Also on 7 October, the Israeli government
blocked electricity sold to Gaza. On 9
October, it imposed a full siege, cutting off all
supplies including food, water, fuel and
medicines.
Media workers were also attacked. The
Committee to Protect Journalists reported
that 70 journalists were killed. Film-maker
Roshdi Sarraj was killed in an air strike on 22
October on his home in Gaza City.
Medical personnel also faced attacks in the
area. By December, 23 of 36 hospitals had
been forced to close because of damage and
lack of electricity. The WHO reported that
600 patients and medical personnel were
killed in attacks on medical facilities,
including 76 ambulances. In the north of
Gaza, al-Ahli and al-Shifa hospitals were
operating at 5% of capacity while being
overwhelmed with wounded and sick people.
Hospital bed occupancy was at 310%,
according to the Palestinian Red Crescent
Society. Its al-Amal hospital in Khan Yunis
was targeted with a drone on 24 December,
killing a 13-year-old boy.
LEBANON
Hizbullah, a political party with an armed
wing, and other armed groups in Lebanon,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

fired rockets at northern Israel (see Lebanon
entry). On 16 October, Israeli artillery used
white phosphorus to shell the southern
Lebanese town of Dhayra. Cross-border
strikes killed some 120 people in Lebanon,
and more than 10 in Israel. Israeli strikes on
a group of seven journalists in south Lebanon
on 13 October killed Reuters journalist Issam
Abdallah.

APARTHEID
Israeli authorities maintained their system of
apartheid, passing laws that deepened the
segregation of Palestinians from Israelis,
confined Palestinians to deprived locations,
and implementing policies that furthered the
systematic dispossession of Palestinians.
Wanton destruction, home demolitions,
denial of access to livelihoods, and statebacked settler violence, all intensified forced
displacement.
An amendment to the Citizenship and Entry
into Israel Law passed on 15 February
facilitated the stripping of Palestinians’
citizenship and permanent residency,
potentially rendering some Palestinians
stateless. On 25 July, the Knesset approved
an amendment to the Cooperative Societies
Ordinance that expanded admission
committees in 437 Jewish collective towns,
with powers to exclude Palestinians under
the vague pretext of “social unsuitability”,
according to Adalah, a legal organization
protecting the rights of Palestinian citizens of
Israel.
FORCED DISPLACEMENT
OCHA recorded demolitions without military
justification of 1,128 buildings, forcibly
displacing 2,249 Palestinians in the West
Bank including East Jerusalem. Additionally,
the Israeli High Court of Justice approved the
demolition of six homes of relatives of
suspected attackers, despite Israeli civil
rights organization HaMoked’s objection that
this constituted collective punishment.
Meanwhile, Israeli authorities approved the
construction of 18,500 settler homes in East
Jerusalem alone, according to Israeli urban
planners Ir Amim. Settlements in the rest of

The State of the World’s Human Rights

the West Bank, illegal under international law,
also continued to expand.
Settler violence spread with the accession of
politicians who incited racial violence, and
significantly increased after 7 October. Israeli
settlers killed 18 Palestinians and injured
367, while Palestinian attackers killed 18
settlers and injured 107, according to OCHA.
Military and settler actions created coercive
environments that displaced all 1,009
inhabitants of 16 herding communities,
according to human rights organization
B’Tselem. On 11 October, Israeli settlers
killed three Palestinians in a family home in
Qusra, near Huwara. A fourth was shot dead
when Israeli soldiers came to protect the
settlers. On 30 October, dozens of settlers set
fire to two homes in Isfay al-Tahta in Masafer
Yatta, southern West Bank. Many settlers
were armed, some wore army uniforms, and
most violent settlers enjoyed impunity for
their crimes.6
The authorities continued to deny
recognition to Palestinian citizens of Israel in
35 Bedouin villages in the Negev/Naqab in
southern Israel, and to conduct home
demolitions there. In July, courts approved
the forced eviction of all 500 residents of Ras
Jrabah. The residents had asked to be
incorporated as a neighbourhood into the
nearby Jewish city of Dimona but the local
authorities dismissed that request without
due consultation. On 27 September, Israeli
forces demolished the village of al-‘Araqib for
the 222nd time.
In Gaza on 12 October, the Israeli army
issued a vague collective “evacuation order”
to all 1.1 million residents in northern Gaza.
In November and December, Israeli forces
ordered the displacement of civilians in
southern areas, including Deir al-Balah and
Khan Younis. By early December, 1.9 million
Palestinians were forcibly displaced in Gaza.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
WEST BANK INCLUDING EAST JERUSALEM
The year was the deadliest for Palestinians in
the West Bank since 2005, as Israeli policing
operations became increasingly lethal amid

213

impunity for police killings and incitement
from leaders.
According to OCHA, Israeli forces killed 493
Palestinians, mostly civilians, during
operations against armed groups in Jenin
and Nablus. Over 12,500 were injured.
Defence for Children International-Palestine
reported that Israeli forces killed 110 children
in the West Bank including Jerusalem in
2023. On 5 June, Mohammed al-Tamimi,
aged three, succumbed to his wounds after
being shot by Israeli forces in Nabi Saleh
north of Ramallah as his father drove him to
a birthday party. No criminal investigation
was opened.
Throughout the year, Jenin refugee camp in
the north endured Israeli law enforcement
operations that killed at least 23 Palestinians
between January and July. Revenge attacks
by armed Palestinians against Israeli civilians
killed four near the settlement of Eli on 20
June. On 21 June, hundreds of settlers
attacked the Palestinian village of
Turmusayya south of Eli, killing one resident
and setting 15 houses on fire. From October,
Israeli forces raided Jenin repeatedly, killing
at least 116 people, according to the
Palestinian ministry of health, including in an
air strike on Al-Ansar mosque on 22 October.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATIONS
Israeli authorities failed to promptly,
thoroughly and independently investigate
crimes and violations committed by the
Israeli army, including unlawful killings in the
West Bank and war crimes in Gaza. Israel
continued to refuse to cooperate with the UN
commission of inquiry and to deny entry to
the UN Special Rapporteur on the OPT. At
the end of October, the ICC prosecutor visited
Israel, the West Bank, and the Rafah
Crossing on Egypt’s border with Gaza. On 29
December, South Africa applied to the ICJ for
proceedings to be initiated against Israel
regarding its breaches of the 1948 Genocide
Convention in Gaza.

214

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
Arbitrary restrictions on Palestinians’
movement were further tightened after 7
October, in some cases amounting to
collective punishment. The closures
prevented patients’ transfer to hospitals.
In the West Bank including East Jerusalem,
OCHA documented 645 checkpoints,
roadblocks and barriers, 80 of which were in
Hebron in the south, where some 600
settlers lived illegally in the midst of the most
populous West Bank city. After 7 October, the
Israeli army imposed a 14-day total curfew on
some 750 families in 11 neighbourhoods in
downtown Hebron, according to B’Tselem.
Checkpoint 54 in Hebron, fortified with facial
recognition technology, automated the
exclusion of Palestinians. Facial recognition
technology also restricted Palestinians’
access in East Jerusalem.7 The army
imposed closures of villages and refugee
camps, and restricted access to farmland.
Thousands of workers from Gaza in Israel
and the West Bank found their work permits
revoked without warning on 11 October,
when Israeli forces detained them. They were
held incommunicado for at least three weeks
on military bases, where two of them died;
the deaths were not properly investigated.
Israeli forces shot at least eight Palestinian
fishermen at sea, causing permanent
injuries. More than 90% of fishermen’s
families lived in poverty, according to the
Gaza Fishermen’s Union, due to restrictions
on fishing areas and exports.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Health services in the OPT deteriorated from
January, when Israel withheld tax revenues
collected on behalf of Palestinian authorities,
resulting in medicine shortages. Due to
Israel’s blockade, nearly 400 children in Gaza
were denied access to critical treatment in
the first half of the year, according to Save
the Children.
Gazan health facilities were wrecked by
attacks from October onwards, and medical
reserves were used to treat some 55,000
injured people. As the borders were sealed,
even severely injured people could not seek

The State of the World’s Human Rights

treatment outside Gaza. Overcrowding in
improvised shelters with one toilet per 486
people, no clean water or sanitation, caused
a surge in respiratory, stomach and skin
infections. One thousand injured children
had legs amputated in inadequate
conditions, according to UNICEF. By midDecember, 93% of people in Gaza were
starving, according to the WHO, making them
vulnerable to death from otherwise curable
diseases, with pregnant and breastfeeding
women at particular risk.

blindfolded, stripped of their clothes, with
their hands tied, on two occasions.9
In March, a court extended the prolonged
solitary confinement of Ahmad Manasra, who
suffered repeated mental health crises.10 In
May, prisoner Khader Adnan died after a
three-month hunger strike without adequate
medical care, making him the first
Palestinian prisoner to die on hunger strike in
30 years.

ARBITRARY DETENTION

After the government announced judicial
reform plans in January, hundreds of
thousands of Israelis demonstrated in protest.
Police in some cases responded with
excessive force and carried out dozens of
arbitrary arrests.
Military Order 101 continued to suppress
Palestinians’ right to peacefully protest and
assemble in the West Bank. In September,
Israeli forces vandalized the student council
building of Birzeit University. On 8 November,
the High Court of Justice rejected a petition
demanding police permission for anti-war
demonstrations in Palestinian towns in
northern Israel. Demonstrations by Jewish
citizens of Israel were permitted.

Israeli forces arrested 2,200 Palestinians in
the month following 7 October, according to
the Palestinian Prisoners Club.8 Israeli
authorities invoked the “Unlawful
Combatants” Law, a category that does not
exist in international humanitarian law, to
hold without charge or trial 661 Palestinians
from Gaza. Some 3,291 Palestinians were
held under administrative detention, without
charge or trial, according to HaMoked.
The ICRC confirmed that Palestinian
prisoners were denied contact with their
families and lawyers after 7 October, under
“state of emergency” orders that were
extended on 31 October until the end of the
year.
Israeli authorities refused to share their
summary of evidence and arguments in the
conviction of prisoner of conscience
Mohammed al-Halabi, a humanitarian worker
from Gaza.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
On 5 and 6 April, Israeli forces beat men,
women and children worshipping at Al-Aqsa
mosque in Jerusalem, inflaming religious
tensions. They arrested at least 450
Palestinians on the mosque esplanade, later
released barefoot and beaten.
Torture and other ill-treatment increased
after 7 October, with at least six prisoners
dying in unclarified circumstances, according
to the Public Committee against Torture.
Israeli soldiers beat Palestinians while
detaining them in the street in Gaza

The State of the World’s Human Rights

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
AND ASSEMBLY

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In September, the government approved a
climate change bill, which committed to
reducing emissions by 30% by 2030 but
lacked enforcement mechanisms.
Israel, a high-income country, failed to take
steps to phase out fossil fuels. Rather, on 29
October, the energy ministry launched new
gas exploration.
The heavy bombardment of Gaza emitted
pollution and greenhouse gases, harming the
environment and health for years to come,
according to the UN Special Rapporteur on
human rights and the environment.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Government ministers incited discrimination
against LGBTI people and women, whose
personal status continued to be governed by
religious law. On 28 December, the Israeli

215

High Court ruled that the state can no longer
discriminate against same-sex couples
looking to adopt children.

parts of the country. Italy was at risk of
failing to meet carbon emission reduction
targets.

CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT

Eight conscripts – Jewish and Arab citizens of
Israel – were imprisoned for refusing military
service, stating that their principles forbid the
oppression of Palestinians. Yuval Dag was
imprisoned four times between March and
June.

In June, five police officers in Verona were
placed under house arrest as part of an
investigation into acts of torture aggravated
by racial hatred, mostly against foreign
nationals. Others were also investigated for
violent offences, while many more were
transferred for failing to report their
colleagues’ abuses, including the chief of the
city police. In March, more than 20 prison
officers under investigation for alleged torture
in the prison of Biella were suspended. The
trial continued of 105 prison officers and
other officials accused of multiple offences,
including torture, following the suppression of
a protest in the Santa Maria Capua Vetere
prison in April 2020. Two other officers who
had chosen an accelerated court proceeding
were acquitted in June.
A draft bill to abrogate the crime of torture
raised concerns that Italy was preparing to
backtrack on international obligations to
guarantee freedom from torture.1

1. “Israel/OPT: Defending the rule of law, enforcing apartheid – the
double life of Israel’s judiciary”, 13 September
2. “Israel/OPT: Civilian deaths and extensive destruction in latest Gaza
offensive highlight human toll of apartheid”, 13 June
3. “Israel/OPT: Damning evidence of war crimes as Israeli attacks wipe
out entire families in Gaza”, 20 October
4. “Israel/OPT: ‘Nowhere safe in Gaza’: Unlawful Israeli strikes illustrate
callous disregard for Palestinian lives”, 20 November
5. “Israel/OPT: US-made munitions killed 43 civilians in two
documented Israeli air strikes in Gaza – new investigation”, 5
December
6. “Israel/OPT: Impunity reigns for perpetrators of settler violence”, 3
March
7. Israel/OPT: Automated Apartheid: How Facial Recognition Fragments,
Segregates and Controls Palestinians in the OPT, 2 May
8. “Israel/OPT: Horrifying cases of torture and degrading treatment of
Palestinian detainees amid spike in arbitrary arrests”, 8 November
9. “Israel/OPT: Urgently investigate inhumane treatment and enforced
disappearance of Palestinians detainees from Gaza”, 20 December
10. “Israel/OPT: After nearly two years in solitary confinement, Ahmad
Manasra too ill to attend his hearing”, 21 September

ITALY
Republic of Italy
There were new reports of torture and
other ill-treatment by prison and police
officers. Climate justice activists faced
disproportionate restrictions on the right to
peaceful assembly. Gender-based violence
remained at unacceptably high levels.
Access to asylum was significantly
restricted, including through unlawful
measures. Concern about hate speech and
hate crime persisted and antidiscrimination safeguards were inadequate.
Access to abortion remained difficult in

216

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
A government-backed bill to criminalize the
defacing or damaging of heritage buildings
and artifacts during demonstrations was
under discussion in parliament. In April, the
UN Special Rapporteur on environmental
defenders under the the Aarhus Convention
criticized the bill and urged the authorities to
refrain from disproportionately restricting
peaceful acts of civil disobedience by climate
justice protesters. In November, another
government-backed bill proposed harsher
penalties for protesters involved in organizing
road blocks in certain circumstances.
Police used excessive force against
protesters on some occasions. In July, in
Piedmont, at a largely peaceful
demonstration to oppose a high-speed
railway project, police made unnecessary and
indiscriminate use of tear gas.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
There were 97 killings of women in domestic
violence incidents, with 64 killed by their
partners or former partners. Strengthened
protective measures to prevent attacks were
proposed, including in response to the killing
of a young woman by her former boyfriend in
November, in the town of Pordenone in FriuliVenezia Giulia. In December, following her
visit in June, the Council of Europe’s
Commissioner for Human Rights criticized
the shortage of shelters for women victims of
gender-based violence and the scarcity of
funds for service providers.
Parliament failed to bring rape laws in line
with the Council of Europe Convention on
preventing and combating violence against
women and domestic violence (Istanbul
Convention).

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The central Mediterranean route remained
the most dangerous migration route in the
world, with 2,498 people drowning or going
missing during the year trying to reach
Europe, a dramatic increase from 1,417 in
2022. Most had departed from Libya and
Tunisia. More than 157,600 people arrived
irregularly by sea, including more than
17,300 unaccompanied children, compared
with about 105,000 people in 2022.
Thousands of the people disembarked in
Italy were rescued by Italian authorities.
There were concerns, however, that Italy was
not always fulfilling its search-and-rescue
obligations. In February, at least 94 people,
including 34 children, drowned near the
beach of Steccato di Cutro , Calabria, in
Italian territorial waters. Six hours before the
ship sank, Frontex, the EU Border and Coast
Guard Agency, had shared information about
the boat with Italian authorities, who had not
immediately launched a rescue operation.
Criminal investigations were ongoing to
determine responsibilities.
NGOs rescuing people at sea remained
subject to unnecessary requirements,
including that they request a port for
disembarkation and make their way there
immediately after each rescue, limiting the

The State of the World’s Human Rights

possibility of saving more people in one
operation. In some cases, authorities forced
NGO rescue ships to navigate over 1,000km
to reach ports assigned for disembarkation,
when closer suitable ports were available. In
January and again in December, the Council
of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights
asked the government to withdraw the
measures.2
In March, the government updated the list
of “safe countries of origin”, adding Nigeria
and confirming Tunisia among them, despite
evidence of widespread human rights
violations in both countries. In May,
parliament abolished special protection
permits, a complementary form of protection
for asylum seekers and others who would be
at risk if repatriated, and significantly limited
permits based on other grounds. It also
introduced accelerated border procedures to
examine asylum applications from people
coming from countries regarded as “safe”.
Some of the new provisions were in breach of
international standards. In October, the
courts ordered the release of several people
detained under the new accelerated border
procedures, ruling that asylum seekers could
not be deprived of their liberty solely on the
basis that they were from countries
presumed to be safe. The government
appealed against the rulings. In October,
parliament approved further measures aimed
at restricting access to asylum and expanding
the possibility of expelling people.
In November, the prime ministers of Italy
and Albania agreed the creation of two
detention facilities for asylum seekers and
migrants on Albanian territory, claiming these
would be under Italian jurisdiction, leading to
concerns about arbitrary detention,
refoulement and effective access to asylum.
COOPERATION WITH LIBYA
Support for Libyan authorities to contain
people in that country continued, including
by renewing the Memorandum of
Understanding, regardless of overwhelming
evidence of widespread, serious human
rights violations against refugees and
migrants disembarked in Libya. In March, a
shipwreck in the Libyan search-and-rescue

217

region, which claimed more than 30 lives,
provided a further illustration of the inability
of Libyan authorities to fulfil their search-andrescue responsibilities. Despite this, in June,
parliament extended support for Libyan
coastguards aimed at increasing their
capacity to conduct interceptions at sea.3
CRIMINALIZATION OF SOLIDARITY
The case against the crews of the
Iuventa and other NGO rescue ships before
the tribunal of Trapani in Sicily for facilitating
irregular migration in connection with rescue
operations in 2016 and 2017 had not
concluded by the end of the year. This
preliminary hearing had already lasted 18
months.

DISCRIMINATION
In August, the CERD Committee expressed
concern about racist hate speech; racist
political discourse, including from members
of government; the proliferation of racist hate
incidents; and the many cases of racist
abuse and ill-treatment against ethnic
minorities and migrants by law enforcement
officials.
In November, a Jewish monitoring centre
reported a significant increase in antisemitic
incidents in October, following the start of the
new conflict in Israel and the Occupied
Palestinian Territories.
Laws against hate speech and hate crimes
were not extended to offer LGBTI people,
women and people with disabilities the same
protections available to victims of hate based
on racist, religious, ethnic and nationalist
motives.
Children of foreign nationals born and/or
grown up in Italy continued to be deprived of
an effective access to citizenship, with more
than 1.5 million children facing
discrimination in accessing rights as a result.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In several regions, obstacles to access
abortion persisted, mostly due to the high
number of doctors and other healthcare
providers refusing to deliver abortion care.
There was concern over the proliferation of

218

national and regional bills focusing on the
protection of the fetus.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Record-breaking temperatures in July, made
much more likely by climate change, saw a
7% increase in mortality over the average in
southern Italy. In June, the government
published a new Energy and Climate Plan,
which some experts noted revealed
insufficient emissions reductions, could allow
the postponement of coal phase-out to 2028
and showed that the country was struggling
to meet the EU target for lower carbon
emissions by 2030. The government
continued to invest in fossil fuel projects
overseas, breaking a 2021 commitment, and
heavily subsidized fossil fuel use.

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
In November, the government suspended
new licences for exporting weapons and
military equipment to Israel. Exports relying
on past licences continued, however, despite
mounting evidence of unlawful attacks on
civilians and civilian objects by Israel in the
occupied Gaza Strip.
1. “Italy: Backtracking on guaranteeing freedom from torture”, 3
November
2. “Italy: Withdraw measures that hinder the work of search and rescue
NGOs and increase the risk of drownings”, 1 February
3. “Italy: Avoidable loss of life at sea calls for swift review of search
and rescue procedures and visa policies”, 17 March

JAPAN
Japan
The government failed to commit to ending
the use of coal in electricity production.
There was limited progress towards greater
legal recognition of LGBTI people’s rights,
but discrimination against them, as well as
women and ethnic Korean people, remained
entrenched. A new immigration law violated
the rights of refugees and asylum seekers.
The retrial of Japan’s longest-serving death
row prisoner began.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Despite record-breaking summer
temperatures and associated deaths, Japan
remained the only wealthy industrialized
country not to have committed to phasing out
the use of coal in electricity production.
Environmental experts remained critical of
government plans, first announced in 2022,
to blend ammonia with coal to reduce power
sector carbon emissions, as being largely
ineffective as well as dangerous for humans
and wildlife. They called instead for
investment in renewable energy.

DISCRIMINATION
LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In June, the legislature passed a law on
sexual orientation and gender identity which
required the government to draw up a plan to
promote LGBTI people’s rights and protect
them from “unjustified” discrimination. The
law did not define what is meant by
“unjustified” and fell short of ensuring equal
rights for LGBTI people.
In a landmark ruling in October, the
Supreme Court found unconstitutional
provisions in the Gender Identity Disorder
Special Cases Act requiring transgender
people to undergo sterilization as a
requirement for changing their gender in the
family registry.1
The legal ban on same-sex marriage and
other forms of gender-based discrimination
continued to be contested in the courts. In
June, the Fukuoka District Court ruled that
the prohibition on same-sex marriage was not
unconstitutional, but recommended
legislative changes to guarantee better
protections for same-sex couples.2 In
September, the Sapporo District Court ruled
that a person in a same-sex relationship was
not entitled to spousal benefits.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Japan slid down the rankings on gender
equality in the World Economic Forum’s
annual Global Gender Gap Report, falling
from 116th to 125th out of 146
countries. The report found that despite
almost complete parity on educational
attainment and health, political

The State of the World’s Human Rights

representation of women had declined in
recent years and that they held only 10% of
parliamentary seats and less than 10% of
ministerial posts.
ETHNIC KOREANS
Discrimination against ethnic Koreans
continued. On the centenary in September of
a massacre of ethnic Koreans in Japan, the
government refused to officially recognize the
event or apologize.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Parliament adopted amendments to the
Penal Code in June under which certain
forms of non-consensual sexual intercourse
were recognized for the first time as rape,
and the age of sexual consent was raised
from 13 to 16. The statute of limitations for
reporting rape was extended from 10 to 15
years.
In June, Rina Gonoi, a former member of
Japan’s Self-Defence Forces, brought a civil
lawsuit against five former soldiers for mental
distress caused by sexual violence committed
against her while serving in the military, and
against the government for failing to prevent
or properly investigate the assaults. In
December, Fukushima District Court found
three of the five soldiers guilty of “forced
indecency” and sentenced them to
suspended prison sentences of two years
each. A report on a Ministry of Defencecommissioned investigation, published in
August, found an entrenched culture of
harassment, including sexual harassment, in
the military.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
Hundreds of victims sought compensation
for sexual exploitation and abuse linked to
the deceased founder of Johnny and
Associates Entertainment, a talent agency
behind the success of Japanese boy bands.
The company issued a public apology, but
following a visit to Japan in July and August,
the UN Working Group on Business and
Human Rights criticized the inadequate
responses by the government and the
company.

219

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In June, parliament passed a controversial
Immigration Control and Refugee Recognition
Bill which permits the deportation of
individuals who have applied for refugee
status three times or more. The Bill also
maintained the principle of detention of
asylum seekers, with an exception for cases
where non-custodial monitoring measures
are applied, and failed to prohibit the
detention of children. No maximum length of
detention was provided for, and due process
continued to be denied by failing to allow
judicial reviews of detention orders.3 A joint
letter from UN experts in April raised
concerns about the planned amendments,
noting that Japan’s detention policies
constituted arbitrary detention.
In April and July, two asylum seekers from
Türkiye and Iran were awarded damages of
JPY 220,000 (approximately USD 1,500) and
JPY 5.5 million (approximately USD 37,000)
respectively. They had sued the government
in 2022 in relation to their arbitrary detention
by the immigration authorities.

DEATH PENALTY
The retrial of Hakamada Iwao, the longestserving death row prisoner in Japan, began in
October following an order by the Tokyo High
Court in March which found that his original
conviction in 1968 was based on a forced
confession and doubtful supporting evidence.
Hakamada Iwao was temporarily released
from custody in 2014.4
1. “Japan: Transgender rights progress as court rules surgery not
required for legal gender change”, 25 October
2. “Japan: Fukuoka ruling on same-sex couples shows progress on
LGBTI rights”, 8 June
3. “Japan: ‘Endless Migration’: Migrants speak out as government
proposes harsh immigration bill”, 14 March
4. “Japan: Retrial ruling is step towards justice for world’s ‘longestserving’ death row prisoner”, 13 March

JORDAN
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
The authorities escalated their crackdown
on freedom of expression and association
for political activists, journalists, workers,
political party members, LGBTI people and
others through the use of abusive and
vaguely defined laws. Debt imprisonment
continued, in breach of international law.
Civilians continued to be tried in military
courts. A new law granted Jordanian women
married to non-Jordanian men the right to
retain their nationality, but they remained
unable to pass their nationality to their
spouse and children. LGBTI people faced
harassment and abuse fostered by
“immorality” provisions in the Penal Code
and an anti-LGBTI campaign led by some
parliamentarians.

BACKGROUND
In May, King Abdullah II ended the state of
emergency declared in March 2020 at the
start of the Covid-19 pandemic in Jordan,
which granted the authorities powers to
curtail human rights, including the rights to
freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly.
According to UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, Jordan hosted 655,283 Syrian,
66,686 Iraqi, 12,882 Yemeni and 7,578
Sudanese and Somali refugees in 2023. It
also hosted 2 million Palestinian refugees
registered with the UN Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA). In March, UNHCR and the
World Bank reported that the poverty rate
among Syrian refugees had reached 66%. In
July, the World Food Programme and
UNHCR announced aid cuts due to funding
shortages.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Local governors continued to use the Crime
Prevention Law of 1954 to administratively
detain anyone “deemed to be a danger to
society”, without charge and without access

220

The State of the World’s Human Rights

to due process guarantees. In February and
March, for example, the governor of Madaba
city arbitrarily detained at least two activists
under this law simply for peacefully
exercising their rights to freedom of
expression and assembly, respectively. In
June, the minister of interior ordered local
authorities to release 503 people in
administrative detention held under the
Crime Prevention Law. However, according to
lawyers, they were not released.
On 7 May, acting on a request from the
United Arab Emirates (UAE), airport security
officials in the capital, Amman, detained
Turkish-Emirati citizen Khalaf al-Rumaithi. He
was released on bail and allowed to enter
Jordan but was re-arrested on 8 May before
being extradited to the UAE in secrecy and in
violation of a Jordanian court order.1 Khalaf
al-Rumaithi had been living in exile in Türkiye
for a decade after being sentenced in the
UAE in his absence to 15 years’
imprisonment following a grossly unfair trial
of 94 dissidents.
DEBT IMPRISONMENT
Growing unemployment and an increase in
the cost of living significantly affected
people’s access to essential goods and
services, including food, fuel and water.
Given the lack of an adequate social
protection scheme, hundreds of thousands of
people were in debt to make ends meet. At
least 158,000 people faced debt
imprisonment under the Execution Law,
which provides for a prison sentence of six
months for unpaid debt of more than JOD
5,000 (USD 7,049). Such debt imprisonment
breaches international law.
A 24-year-old woman told Amnesty
International that she had sponsored her 60year-old father to obtain a loan to cover living
expenses. Her father was unable to pay back
the loan, which left them both at risk of
imprisonment as the debt exceeded JOD
5,000.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities investigated or prosecuted at
least 43 individuals for online expression,
including eight political activists and one

The State of the World’s Human Rights

journalist, using abusive and vague laws such
as the Cybercrime Law, Anti-Terrorism Law
and Penal Code. Nine were tried at the State
Security Court (SSC), a military court, on
trumped-up or vague charges, including
“undermining the regime”, spreading fake
news that “undermines the state’s prestige”
and “inciting religious or sectarian strife”.
In January, the SSC charged Sofian al-Tal,
Abed Tawahia and Omar Abu Rassa’ with
“undermining the regime”, which carries a
sentence of up to 20 years in prison. The
political activists were arrested in December
2022 for planning to publicly criticize the
king’s annual speech.
On 9 August, the Amman First Instance
Court, an appeal court, increased the prison
sentence of journalist Ahmad al-Zobi from
three months to one year. He had been
convicted of “inciting sectarian and racial
strife, as well as conflict between the
components of the nation” for a Facebook
post in which he criticized an official during a
transport drivers’ strike against rising fuel
prices. On 21 August, the minister of justice
rejected Ahmad al-Zobi’s request to appeal
against the verdict before the Court of
Cassation.
On 12 August, the king approved a new
cybercrime law, further repressing
individuals’ right to freely express their
opinions online. The law introduced harsher
prison terms of a minimum of three months
and fines of up to JOD 32,000 (USD
45,115).2 Two independent news platforms
told Amnesty International that they had
removed their comments section because
Article 33 of the law allows “the prosecutor or
court [to] order any website, social media
platform, or person responsible for a public
account to remove or block content deemed
to have violated the law, to temporarily ban
the user or publisher, and to hand over
relevant information, including users’
personal data.”
In November, security forces arrested at
least three individuals under the new
cybercrime law for their online opinion about
the conflict in Gaza, Palestine, including
defending Palestinian rights. The public

221

prosecutor charged them with “inciting
sedition, strife, and hatred”, “sending, resending, or publishing libel or slander
information”, “defaming of an official body”
and “publishing pictures, information, or
news of law enforcement officials”.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
In May, the authorities intimidated scores of
Partnership and Salvation Party members
into resigning from their party positions so
that the number of founding members fell
below 1,000, the minimum required for
registration under the Political Parties Law of
2022. A lawyer and party member told
Amnesty International that the party had
fulfilled all conditions for registration,
including the minimum number of members
who have never been convicted of crimes
that violate “honour, morals and security”.
However, a week after the party held its first
annual meeting, the independent elector
committee dissolved it, claiming that 130
members had been convicted of crimes that
violated the Political Parties Law. The party
brought a case before the Administrative
Court after the accused members submitted
proof of innocence to the electoral
committee.
The authorities failed to call for the election
of a new board for the teachers’ syndicate
after a court order dissolved the previous one
in 2020. A lawyer told Amnesty International
that the authorities forced several members
of the former board into early retirement in an
effort to prevent them from participating in
elections.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
In January, parliament approved a law
granting Jordanian women married to nonJordanian men the right to retain their
nationality. Formerly, women had to renounce
their nationality when marrying a nonJordanian man, only regaining it if they were
widowed or divorced. Women remained
unable to pass their nationality to their
spouse and children.
In March, parliament approved
amendments to the Labour Law, which

222

included imposing fines of JOD 2,000-5,000
(USD 2,820-7,049) on individuals found
responsible for sexual harassment in the
workplace.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The authorities continued to use vaguely
defined Penal Code “immorality” provisions
to target LGBTI individuals, even though
same-sex sexual relations are not
criminalized by law.
In July, some parliamentarians spearheaded
an anti-LGBTI campaign on social media,
calling for same-sex sexual relations to be
criminalized, which triggered a wave of hate
speech and threats by members of the public
against LGBTI individuals and supporters.
Two activists told Amnesty International that
security services intimidated and harassed
the organizers of a screening of an LGBTIrelated film into cancelling the event.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Jordan continued to be one of the most
water-stressed countries in the world. It
reported that it is using more water resources
than are being renewed and that climate
change will significantly decrease the amount
of water resources available.
In September, Jordan announced a cut on
water subsidies for households that consume
more than 6m3 of water per month.
The government did not announce a new
Nationally Determined Contribution; in 2021,
it had raised its macroeconomic greenhouse
gas emission reduction target from 14% to
31% by 2030. The authorities said they
would not be able to meet this target nor
implement needed adaptation measures
without significant financial support.
1. “UAE: Authorities must ensure man forcibly deported is safe, afforded
fair trial rights”, 18 May
2. “Jordan’s new proposed cybercrimes law will strongly undermine
digital rights”, 27 July

The State of the World’s Human Rights

KAZAKHSTAN
Republic of Kazakhstan
The rights to freedom of expression,
peaceful assembly and association
continued to be unduly restricted.
Prosecution of members of the security
forces for unlawful killings, and torture and
other ill-treatment during mass protests in
January 2022 continued, but often resulted
in sentences not commensurate with the
gravity of the offence. Police regularly
disrupted or prevented peaceful political
street protests. Practising religion outside
registered religious organizations remained
banned. Widespread violence against
women and girls continued. Climate action
policies remained inadequate.

BACKGROUND
President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev’s promise
in 2022 to “reload and renew all key political
institutions” by mid-2023 was fulfilled only
nominally. Snap parliamentary elections in
March were marred by numerous allegations
of violations in favour of the ruling Amanat
party, which secured a majority.
Kazakhstan hosted an official visit by
Russian president Vladimir Putin in
November, but rejected accusations of
subverting Western economic sanctions
against Russia by pursuing cooperation with
that country.
Human rights violations continued in the
wake of protests in January 2022, when at
least 219 civilians and 19 law enforcement
officers were killed after security forces used
rubber bullets and firearms indiscriminately
and unlawfully against peaceful protesters
and violent mobs, looters and bystanders.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
Legislation and practice relating to peaceful
assemblies remained unduly restrictive. Prior
permission was required even for a single
person picket, and holding or simply
planning an “unauthorized” assembly or
picket was punishable by up to 15 days in

The State of the World’s Human Rights

jail. The 12-month statute of limitation for this
“offence” allowed the authorities to jail
protesters long after the event, often to
prevent them from participating in further
protests. For example, ahead of the
announced but “unauthorized” peaceful
protests on Republic Day on 25 October, 13
activists, supporters of the unregistered
political party Alga, Kazakhstan!, were
arrested and detained for 15 days for
attending “unauthorized” rallies in the past.
Some protesters faced much harsher
criminal punishment. In July, five people who
had peacefully protested in January 2022
received sentences of up to eight years’
imprisonment after an unfair trial marred by
allegations of torture and witness
intimidation.1
Peaceful assemblies could only be held in
designated locations (of which there were
only three or four in any city or town) without
the risk of a fine or jail. A feminist march
planned for 8 March in the city of Almaty was
banned on the pretext of another group
having already booked the only street
designated for marches. The feminist rally
was instead held in a designated cramped
square and the other group’s march did not
take place at all.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
During the year only three cases against
police officers or soldiers for unlawful use of
firearms during the January 2022 events
reached court. They included a contract
soldier acquitted in November by the Almaty
Garrison Military Court. He had been charged
with abuse of authority for shooting and
killing a four-year-old girl who was in a car
with her siblings on their way to shop for
groceries.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Impunity for torture and other ill-treatment
remained widespread. Amendments to the
criminal code in January separated the
offence of torture from other ill-treatment,
with torture to be investigated by specialized
prosecutors.

223

Most criminal cases for torture and other illtreatment following the January 2022 events
were dropped for alleged lack of evidence.
Some cases were requalified as abuse of
authority or other lesser crimes, and some
were dropped due to plea agreements with
the suspects. Out of the six officially
acknowledged cases of death caused by
torture, five reached court by the end of
2023. They included two police officers given
a non-custodial sentence of four years’
conditional imprisonment in the city of Semey
on a charge of torture causing the death of
Zhandos Zhotabayev. A nurse was also
sentenced in the same case to one year’s
conditional imprisonment for non-fulfilment
of duties.
Prosecutions in other cases of torture and
other ill-treatment were marred by many
procedural violations. Only a few victims of
torture received compensation, up to the
equivalent of EUR 245, from the state-run
Victim Compensation Fund.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The human rights community in Kazakhstan
recorded 23 people imprisoned on political
grounds during the year, including human
rights defenders, activists, bloggers and
journalists.
In July, the law on Internet Platforms and
Internet Advertising entered into force. It
mandated fines for unintentionally posting or
spreading false information on social media
and any other internet platforms by users,
owners, and online influencers. In November,
following a complaint by a private individual,
a court fined the Radio Free Europe/Radio
Liberty editorial office in Kazakhstan (Radio
Azattyq) the equivalent of EUR 200 for a
publication stating that the Collective Security
Treaty Organization “was run by Russia”.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Ten individuals were convicted and
imprisoned following unfair trials for being
supporters of unregistered peaceful
opposition political parties or movements
allegedly linked to the Democratic Choice of
Kazakhstan movement, designated

224

“extremist” by a court in the capital, Astana,
in 2018. On 30 November, Marat
Zhylanbayev was sentenced to seven years’
imprisonment for purportedly financing and
supporting “extremist activities”. Participation
in organizations designated “extremist”
remained punishable by up to six years’
imprisonment. Five more individuals were
under investigation at year’s end.
Registering an opposition political party
remained virtually impossible, and operating
without registration could entail prosecution.
In April, Zhanbolat Mamay, the leader of the
Democratic Party of Kazakhstan, which had
been arbitrarily denied registration, was
convicted of organizing mass unrest during
the January 2022 events. He was given a sixyear suspended sentence and banned from
participating in any public events including
on social media.
In September, for the first time ever, the
State Revenue Committee published a list of
physical and legal entities who had received
foreign funding during the first six months of
2023. The list included 240 individuals and
organizations including such prominent
human rights NGOs as the Kazakhstan
International Bureau for Human Rights and
Rule of Law and the International Foundation
for Protection of Freedom of Speech “Ӓdil
Sӧz”. ̈ The requirement to report foreign
funding extended to fees payable for
conducting surveys and polls, providing legal
aid, or collecting and distributing information.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Practising a religion outside a registered
religious organization remained prohibited.
Any missionary activity remained subject to
mandatory state accreditation, and only
members of registered religious organizations
could apply for such accreditation. Religious
organizations could only be registered if they
had no fewer than 50 founding members for
local organizations, 500 members for regional
organizations, and 5,000 for nationwide
organizations. Distributing religious materials
was prohibited without prior agreement by
state-approved religious experts.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

In August, the Ministry of Education
reinforced the ban on any religious symbols
as part of school uniforms, sparking intense
public debate. Local human rights defenders
estimated that as a result of hijabs falling
within this ban no fewer than 2,000 Muslim
schoolgirls were withdrawn from school by
their parents between September and
November alone.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Violence against women and girls continued
to be widespread throughout the country. The
majority, and possibly all, of the 64 domestic
killings officially registered from January to
August were of women. The penalty for a first
offence for what was officially regarded as a
minor physical assault committed in a family
setting was only a formal police warning.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In its 2023 ranking, the Climate Change
Performance Index noted Kazakhstan’s small
improvement relative to other countries, but
criticized its climate policies and action as
leading to rising, rather than falling,
emissions and therefore inconsistent with a
1.5°C global temperature rise pathway.
Kazakhstan remained among the top 30
greenhouse gas polluters globally.
Meanwhile, the country suffered
environmental disasters exacerbated by
climate change, including forest fires in Abai
region in eastern Kazakhstan leading to the
death of 14 firefighters. Air pollution, mainly
from burning fossil fuels, especially coal, was
estimated to have caused more than 10,000
premature deaths annually.
1. “Kazakhstan: Release peaceful protesters”, 31 July

KENYA

peaceful assembly was violated, with at
least 57 protesters killed by the authorities
in an attempt to suppress dissent. The
authorities failed to take measures to
protect the right to life. Trials of police
officers accused of unlawful killings were
repeatedly delayed. LGBTI people’s rights
were threatened by a proposed homophobic
bill. Radical taxation reforms and the rising
cost of living threatened Kenyan people’s
ability to sustain themselves. A proposed
increase in individual health insurance
contributions undermined the right to
health for those who could not afford them.
Five million people were at risk of acute
food insecurity because of the prolonged
drought. The government failed to promote
the right to privacy of thousands of Kenyans
who unknowingly sold private information to
the WorldCoin company. Parliament took
steps to abolish the death penalty.

BACKGROUND
President Ruto’s first year in office was
marked by a spike in the cost of living,
prompting nationwide demonstrations.
On 9 October, the high court put a
temporary block on the deployment of 1,000
police officers to assist the Haitian National
Police in tackling widespread gang violence,
pending a petition filed by the Thirdway
Alliance Party. Civil society organizations also
objected to the deployment, citing the
Kenyan police’s continued unlawful use of
force, especially against protesters. A few
days later a cabinet resolution was passed to
deploy officers to Haiti, but on 24 October the
high court extended the block. The intended
deployment, which was backed by the UN
Security Council and the US government,
was approved by parliament in November but
had not been implemented by the end of the
year.

Republic of Kenya

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS AND
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES

Security forces continued to enjoy impunity
for extrajudicial killings, unlawful killings
and enforced disappearances. The right to

There were 136 extrajudicial executions
during the year. Most of the victims died
while in police custody or had last been seen
in police custody. Only 28 cases, including

The State of the World’s Human Rights

225

from previous years, were subject to judicial
proceedings.
There was insignificant progress towards
holding police officers accountable for
extrajudicial killings, including in the case of
at least 37 bodies found in Yala River, and
other bodies found elsewhere, in 2022. The
government failed to implement the National
Coroners Service Act, which includes a
provision that provides for the creation of an
office of the coroner general to coordinate
investigations into unexplained killings.
In February, Lilian Waithera was killed by an
unidentified assailant while assisting in an
anti-corruption case against senior
government officials. A suspect was arrested
but there was no further information from the
authorities regarding the investigation into her
killing.
Ten men were forcibly disappeared. The
government failed to facilitate prompt,
thorough, impartial, independent, transparent
and effective investigations into enforced
disappearances or extrajudicial executions or
to ratify the International Convention against
Enforced Disappearance.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Between March and July, police used
excessive force to disrupt and prevent
protests against the increasing cost of living
and alleged 2022 electoral irregularities.
According to the Independent Policing
Oversight Authority, 57 people were killed
during the demonstrations. Amnesty
International verified 30 of these cases,
attributing the deaths to live bullets, blunt
force trauma, and smoke inhalation as a
result of tear gas. Police officers also used
water cannons against protesters and
assaulted them. During this period,
emergency healthcare providers, journalists,
human rights defenders and activists could
not access their places of work due to road
closures and disruptions along their usual
routes. Health workers could therefore not
provide emergency services.
The National Police Service refused to
acknowledge several protest notifications and

226

declared planned demonstrations illegal. The
government attempted to further restrict the
right to peaceful assembly by adding
provisions to the Public Order Act, which
undermined constitutional protections.
In October, the police disrupted at least one
private meeting organized against ongoing
Israeli attacks on Gaza. The government had
expressed its support for Israel.

RIGHT TO LIFE
For six years, the authorities failed to
investigate reports of abuses against
hundreds of people, allegedly carried out by
Good News International Ministries in Kilifi
county. In March, mass graves were
discovered containing the bodies of at least
428 people, including at least nine children,
according to a senate committee’s report.
Media sources attributed the deaths to
leaders of Good News International
Ministries. Post-mortems revealed that they
had suffered starvation, blunt force trauma
and strangulation. In April, some of the
suspected perpetrators were arrested and
were facing trial for terrorism-related charges.
They included the leader of Good News
International Ministries who was also
sentenced to 12 months’ imprisonment for
operating a film studio and producing films
without a licence.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
There was no progress in court cases against
police officers charged with unlawful killings.
The case of a police officer accused of killing
two unarmed boys in Eastleigh, Nairobi, in
2017 was yet to be heard. The case against
the police officer accused of killing Yassin
Moyo, a 14-year-old boy, in 2020 during the
Covid-19 curfew, was yet to be heard, having
been adjourned several times. The case
against the officer accused of killing Carilton
Maina in 2018 in the Kibera Laini Saba area
was adjourned more than 10 times. Evans
Njoroge, a Meru University student, was shot
at close range during a peaceful protest in
2018. The case against the police officer

The State of the World’s Human Rights

accused of having followed and shot him was
yet to be concluded.
The National Dialogue Committee, which
was formed to hear Kenyan people’s views,
and to advise the government on national
issues, including on the “anti-government”
protests (see above, Freedom of expression
and assembly), failed to effectively address
police brutality and remedies for the 57
people killed, and for many others who were
injured, during protests.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In February, the Supreme Court affirmed the
right to freedom of association for LGBTI
people, and directed the Non-Governmental
Organizations Coordination Board to register
associations representing LGBTI rights,
without discrimination. The judgment
sparked a backlash, including death threats
against LGBTI people. In April, the Homa Bay
Town MP, Peter Kaluma, proposed the Family
Protection Bill to parliament, which, if
adopted, would further criminalize
consensual same-sex sexual conduct and
prescribe the death penalty for “aggravated
homosexuality”.
In January, Edwin Chiloba, a gay man, was
killed in what was described by the
authorities as intimate partner violence.
Government agencies failed to investigate
allegations that his killing was motivated by
his sexuality.

ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL RIGHTS
The government did not keep its promise to
apply progressive taxation. In June,
parliament passed the Finance Act 2023,
which introduced new taxes and increased
the cost of health insurance and pension
contributions for salaried employees. It also
introduced a housing levy and imposed a
value-added tax on certain goods, doubling
the price of fuel and essential commodities.
Later in June, the Finance Act was
challenged at the high court’s Constitutional
and Human Rights division, which stopped
the national treasury from implementing the
new increases. However, the National
Treasury and Economic Planning cabinet

The State of the World’s Human Rights

secretary appealed against the decision on
grounds that it would lead to a loss of KES
0.5 billion (around USD 3.25 million) a day.
In July, the appellate court lifted the freeze on
the implementation, paving the way for the
increased taxes to be imposed.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The government proposed an increase of
2.75% in the healthcare contributions of all
salaried employees. The increase was likely
to have an adverse economic impact on
many Kenyans.
On 20 October, the government launched
the Universal Health Coverage scheme to
ensure accessible healthcare for all, in line
with their 2022 manifesto.
The Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission
Report 2023 detailed incidents of corruption
in health procurement processes.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In July, the government lifted a five-year ban
on logging commercial trees, threatening
native trees and forests.
In September, Kenya hosted the Africa
Climate Week and the Africa Climate Summit,
culminating in the Nairobi Declaration, which
called for the adoption of financial models to
fund initiatives ostensibly to address climate
change, but which in many ways failed to
effectively prioritize human rights and climate
justice for Africa.
The drought in northern Kenya persisted for
the fourth year, putting 5 million people
including refugees at risk of acute food
insecurity.
Refugees in Dadaab and Kakuma refugee
camps remained vulnerable to extreme
weather events. The camps are located in
arid and semi-arid climate zones, exposing
residents to high temperatures and low
rainfall in confined and severely overcrowded
areas. Refugees’ access to sanitation, water,
food and other necessities was extremely
limited.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
By June, the Kenyan government had
digitalized 5,000 government services, which

227

raised concerns among Kenyans about
privacy rights. In July, the government’s
digital platform suffered a denial-of-service
cyberattack (an attack intended to shut down
a machine or network), which raised further
doubts about the state’s capacity to
guarantee privacy.
In September, over 350,000 Kenyans “sold”
their iris scans to WorldCoin, a US company,
in exchange for cryptocurrency tokens worth
KES 7,000 (around USD 45). In October, a
court order halted this practice, and the
Office of the Data Protection Commissioner
revoked WorldCoin’s registration status, citing
breaches of the Data Protection Act 2019.

DEATH PENALTY
Kenyan courts continued to impose death
sentences. In September, an MP introduced
bills to remove the death penalty from
legislation. Article 26(3) of the constitution,
which permits the use of the death penalty,
and the Armed Forces Act were not put
forward for amendment. However, the
Parliamentary Justice and Legal Affairs
Committee initiated a law review to ensure
that all acts prescribing the death penalty are
amended in legislation.

KOSOVO
Republic of Kosovo
The trial of former president Hashim Thaçi
on charges of crimes against humanity and
war crimes began in the Hague. A
cooperation agreement was reached with
Serbia to locate people missing since the
conflict ending in 1999. State support for
survivors of domestic violence was
insufficient, forcing many back to abuse.
Journalists and media faced increased
hostility. A court suspended licences for
hydropower plants in Deçan.

BACKGROUND
In March, Kosovo and Serbia reached an EUbrokered agreement to normalize diplomatic
relations, in which Serbia committed not to

228

object to Kosovo’s membership of
international organizations. In September, an
incident in Banjska, a village in Zvečan
municipality, which resulted in the murder of
a Kosovo police officer and three armed
Serbs who had barricaded themselves inside
an Orthodox monastery, further strained
relations.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATIONS
In April, at the Specialist Chambers in the
Hague, the trial commenced of former
president Hashim Thaçi and three other
former commanders of Kosovo’s Liberation
Army accused of war crimes and crimes
against humanity. In December, the Appeals
Panel decreased the sentence for war crimes
against former commander Salih Mustafa
from 26 to 22 years’ imprisonment.
The Specialist Chambers asked Kosovo to
establish a compensation fund for victims of
war crimes.
Also in April, the Court of Appeals in Kosovo
increased the sentence against former
Kosovo Serb police officer Zoran Vukotić from
10 to 13 years’ imprisonment for war crimes
against the civilian population, including rape
and expulsion of ethnic Albanians from their
homes.
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
In May, Kosovo and Serbia reached an
agreement to cooperate in locating over
1,600 people who went missing between 1
January 1998 and 31 December 2000.
Prompt implementation of the agreement
seemed unlikely due to strained relations.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In March, the Constitutional Court held the
state responsible for violating the right to life
of Sebahate Morina, who was murdered by
her husband in March 2021, establishing
that the police and prosecution had failed to
protect her.
A report found that the state response to
domestic violence neglected the needs of
survivors for long-term support to live
independently, forcing many back to abusive
environments.1

The State of the World’s Human Rights

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT

JOURNALISTS
Journalists faced a rising level of attacks,
threats and pressure. In June, following a
boycott of local elections in the north of
Kosovo by the ethnic Serb majority,
journalists were attacked by violent protesters
while reporting on tensions arising as newly
elected ethnic Albanian mayors tried to enter
their offices.
International press freedom organizations
called on authorities to establish “a protocol
to ensure journalists’ safety during violent
protests and riots”.
In June, the government suspended the
business certificate of media company Klan
Kosova sparking criticism by national and
international press freedom organizations. A
court suspended the decision with an interim
measure in August, pending a final decision.

In May, a court ruled in favour of citizens and
local NGOs, Center for Strategic Litigation
and Pishtarët, to annul licences for the
operation of hydropower plants in Deçan on
the grounds that they were issued in violation
of legal requirements.

DISCRIMINATION
ROMA, ASHKALI AND EGYPTIAN PEOPLE
Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian people faced
high rates of unemployment and lack of
equal access to education and health
services. Dozens of Roma people protested in
Gračanica in August, following reports that a
Roma man had been beaten and injured by
the police. The outcome of an investigation
by the Police Inspectorate of Kosovo was
pending at the end of the year.
WOMEN
In August, a court found that the police
discriminated against Luljeta Aliu on the
basis of her gender when they failed to
register her report on a violation of a
domestic violence protection order in 2017.
The court remanded the case to the police
directorate for review.
LGBTI PEOPLE
LGBTI people continued to face
discrimination and low levels of social
acceptance. Despite commitments voiced by
authorities, no specialized shelters were
established for LGBTI survivors of domestic
violence.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
In November, the police banned a proPalestinian protest ahead of a Kosovo-Israel
football match citing security concerns. Two
people were arrested ahead of the match for
“opposing the established rules”, and one of
them was placed on detention for 48 hours,
reportedly for “placing a Palestinian flag with
nationalist graffiti in a bar”.
1. Kosovo: From Paper to Practice: Kosovo must keep its obligations to
survivors of domestic violence, 31 August

KUWAIT
State of Kuwait
Freedom of expression remained restricted
for government critics. Kuwaiti plans to
significantly increase fossil fuel production
defied the international scientific
consensus on how to prevent extreme
climate change. Migrant workers’ rights
were abused. Kuwait’s stateless population,
the Bidun, continued to face
discrimination.

BACKGROUND
The cabinet resigned under parliamentary
pressure in January. The prime minister
formed a new cabinet in June.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Authorities continued to use repressive laws
to suppress freedom of expression when
Kuwaitis criticized the authorities, in
particular regarding the issue of the Bidun,
Kuwait’s native stateless population.
In January, the Ministry of Awqaf and
Islamic Affairs banned the lawyer and
preacher Ahmad al-Asfour from giving

229

sermons for three months because he had
said the state should provide the Bidun with
“a dignified life”.
On 10 August, authorities arrested Fadhel
Dhahi, a Bidun activist previously prosecuted
for participating in a peaceful pro-Bidun
protest in August 2022. They charged him
with “cybercrimes” for his use of X (formerly
Twitter) to criticize Kuwait’s treatment of the
Bidun. He was released on bail on 31
August, but the case against him was
ongoing at the end of the year.
Also in August, the Ministry of Information
submitted to parliament a draft Law on
Regulation of Media, which, like the existing
law, would criminalize criticism of the
emir, and would now explicitly criminalize
criticism of the crown prince and Islamic
religious figures and require state permission
to establish a publishing venture. The
proposed law would add as a new crime
speech that “leads to shaking confidence” in
the country’s currency or economy. The same
month, authorities banned any showing in
Kuwait of an Australian film because it
featured a transgender actor.
On 3 September, authorities arrested Bidun
human rights activist Mohammad al-Bargash,
who had been vocal on social media and in
peaceful demonstrations for Bidun rights for
several years. Like Fadhel Dhahi, he had
participated in and was prosecuted for his
role in the August 2022 protest. Authorities
refused to publish the charges against him or
share them with any party other than the
defence attorney because it was a secret
“state security” case. Judicial authorities
charged him with “undermining the country’s
prestige and standing” by spreading “false
and biased news and rumours” about it on X
and in media interviews. On 25 October, after
more than seven weeks in prison, he was
acquitted and released.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
Public protests in Kuwait remained
infrequent and Kuwaiti law continued to
criminalize those involving over 20 people
that had not received prior permission from

230

authorities. There were no public
demonstrations of significant size in 2023.
In February, a trial of 21 Kuwaitis, both
Bidun and recognized nationals, who
peacefully protested for Bidun rights in 2022,
concluded with convictions and sentences
that involved fines but not prison terms.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Kuwait maintained plans to continue
increasing fossil fuel production until at least
2035, contrary to the international scientific
consensus that phase-out of fossil fuels
needs to begin immediately to prevent
extreme climate change. The state-owned
Kuwait Oil Company announced in June that
it will spend over USD 40 billion between
2023 and 2028 to expand oil production,
including digging new oil wells.
In October, former Kuwait Petroleum
Corporation manager Haitham al-Ghais, also
secretary general of the Organization of the
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), called
for USD 12 trillion of further international
investment in the oil industry by 2045.1
Kuwait remained one of the world’s top five
emitters of CO2 per capita, according to
World Bank data. It faced increasingly
extreme summer heat due to climate change
in recent years, including a heatwave in July.

MIGRANT WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Migrant workers, who make up the vast
majority of the private sector workforce,
continued to be barred from forming unions,
although after five years of residence they
can join existing unions created by Kuwaiti
nationals.
A study published by Kuwaiti and
international researchers in April found
increased rates of injury among migrant
workers in the private sector who do outdoor
labour and have had to work in rising
temperatures in recent years. The study
noted that the government’s regulatory
approach to health and safety for these
workers is inadequate. The existing policy – a
simple time-based ban on outdoor physical
labour from 11am to 4pm during the summer
– does not ensure that workers are not

The State of the World’s Human Rights

labouring in dangerous levels of heat, since
temperatures are often hazardous outside of
those months and hours. Authorities did not
respond with any initiatives to modify this
policy.
The government undermined protection for
migrant domestic workers by shutting down a
safe house rented by the embassy of the
Philippines in Kuwait for workers fleeing
abusive domestic employers.
For the second consecutive year, Kuwait
continued its policy of denying visitor visas to
families of migrant workers.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
Authorities continued to discriminate against
the Bidun in access to the right to education.
As has been the case for three decades,
Bidun families who could not claim a special
exemption (such as having a male family
member in the military or police) could not
send their children to the free government
schools, and instead had to register them in
for-profit private schools. Because the Bidun
population had, on average, far lower income
than recognized nationals, the schools Bidun
families could afford were often inferior to the
free government schools and lacking in basic
equipment.
The government did not allow Bidun
families with expired cards from the Central
System for the Remedy of the Situation of
Illegal Residents, the agency governing Bidun
affairs, to register their children for school in
advance like Kuwaiti citizens. Instead, no
announcement authorizing school registration
for this group was made until 12 September,
giving them just two working days to register
before classes started. Many Bidun do not
renew their Central System cards, which
expire annually, because when they do, they
are at risk of being assigned a false, nonKuwaiti nationality on their new card, making
it more difficult for them to ever end their
statelessness.2

DEATH PENALTY
Kuwait imposed new death sentences and
carried out executions, with the number of

The State of the World’s Human Rights

executions significantly above the average of
recent years.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In January, a court acquitted two defendants
charged with “seeking to resemble the other
gender” because the Constitutional Court
overturned the law criminalizing this conduct
in 2022 on the grounds that it was
unacceptably vague. There were efforts in
parliament to formulate a new law that would
more explicitly criminalize transgender
people.
1. “Global: OPEC chief’s call for huge investment in oil is a formula for
climate disaster”, 3 October
2. Kuwait: ‘I Don’t Have a Future’: Stateless Kuwaitis and the Right to
Education, 17 August

KYRGYZSTAN
The Kyrgyz Republic
The authorities intensified their campaign
to stifle all forms of public criticism and
peaceful dissent. Journalists and activists
critical of the government faced arbitrary
detention, unfounded prosecutions, and
unfair trials. Some activists were held in
conditions amounting to torture or other illtreatment. Peaceful demonstrators faced
serious restrictions. Legislative initiatives
endorsing cultural traditions and regulating
NGOs unduly restricted the rights to
freedom of expression and association and
threatened to stifle the previously vibrant
civil society. Women and girls with
disabilities faced a higher risk of sexual
violence and lacked effective access to
justice.

BACKGROUND
In January, the presidents of Kyrgyzstan and
Uzbekistan signed a border demarcation
agreement that included a contentious deal
on joint management of the Kempir Abad
(Andijan) freshwater reservoir in the south of
the country. Peaceful protests against ceding

231

control of this vital resource had led to arrests
in 2022.
A controversial bill signed into law in
October gave the president the power to
overturn decisions made by the Constitutional
Court if they went against “moral values and
the social conscience of the people”.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities intensified their campaign to
suppress freedom of expression and repress
dissent. Kyrgyzstan fell 50 places in the
Reporters without Borders 2023 Press
Freedom Index to rank 122 out of 180
countries.
In May, a revised version of a restrictive
2022 draft media law was issued for public
consultation following critical independent
expert reviews by the OSCE and the UN
Special Rapporteur on freedom of
expression. The new draft, however, failed to
remove problematic clauses giving the
government undue control over media
regulation, extending media registration
requirements to include online resources,
and prohibiting the dissemination of
“materials that harm the health and morality
of the population”. The draft law was still
pending at the end of the year.
The authorities continued to use the 2021
Law on Protection from False Information to
further restrict media outlets.1
In September, the Ministry of Culture
blocked the website of the independent
Kloop Media Public Foundation after the
State Committee for National Security
complained that an article profiling an
opposition politician contained “false”
allegations that he had been tortured. Kloop
also faced legal proceedings to close its
operations after the prosecutor’s office in
Bishkek, the capital, claimed that it was not
registered as a media outlet and that its
publications contained “sharp criticism” of
government policies and “caused harm” to
public health and well-being.

UNFAIR TRIALS

their human rights. They had been arrested
for peacefully expressing concerns about
ceding control of the Kempir Abad (Andijan)
freshwater reservoir in 2022 (see
Background) and had initially been detained
on false charges of organizing mass disorder.
However, in January, the Ministry of Internal
Affairs classified the case as “secret”, limiting
defendants’ access to case materials. In
April, they were charged arbitrarily with
attempting to violently overthrow the
government, which carries a maximum
sentence of 15 years’ imprisonment. Legal
proceedings started in July and were ongoing
at the end of the year.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
While 16 defendants in the Kempir Abad
case (see above) were transferred to house
arrest, 11 remained in detention in conditions
that could amount to torture or other illtreatment in a pretrial detention centre in
Bishkek. Rita Karasartova, transferred in
June, described spending eight months
locked in a small, unventilated cell with nine
women for 23 hours a day. She was denied
the necessary medical treatment for her
deteriorating health condition, as well as visits
and telephone conversations with her family.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
A blanket ban on demonstrations imposed by
courts in 2022 on central areas of Bishkek,
apart from a small park, was extended up to
31 December.2 In September and October,
courts imposed similar blanket bans on
protests in central public places in Chon-Alai
district in Osh region. State organized rallies
remained exempt.
In January, police in Bishkek detained 27
supporters of the Kempir Abad defendants at
a rally in the designated park. Some
journalists covering the peaceful march were
also detained; most were released without
charge after several hours. A number of
activists were fined for breaching the rules on
holding peaceful protests.

Twenty-seven people faced politically
motivated prosecutions simply for exercising

232

The State of the World’s Human Rights

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
In October, parliament passed in the first
reading unnecessarily restrictive draft
amendments to existing legislation on NGOs,
which would oblige all organizations receiving
funding from abroad to register as “foreign
representatives”, despite widespread
criticism by civil society, government
representatives and international experts.
Under the updated legislation, the authorities
would be able to suspend the activities of an
NGO for six months without a court decision
or to close the organization entirely if it had
failed to additionally register as a “foreign
representative”.3 Penalties included up to 10
years’ imprisonment.

DISCRIMINATION
WOMEN AND GIRLS
In July, the Constitutional Court ruled that
adults could choose to form the middle name
required for official use from their mother’s
name – a “matronymic” – rather than being
restricted to using their father’s name to form
a patronymic. The case was brought by
feminist activist and artist Altyn Kapalova, an
action publicly condemned by senior public
officials, including the president. The
decision was said to have prompted
parliament to adopt a law giving the president
the power to overrule the Constitutional Court
(see above, Background).
In October, the UN Committee on the Rights
of the Child (CRC) expressed deep concern
at the persistent high incidence of genderbased violence, in particular the widespread
abuse and sexual violence against children
with disabilities, including girls. The CRC also
noted that the legal definition of rape was
limited to the use of force, did not include
marital rape, and applied only to female
victims in a “helpless state”.
Women and girls with disabilities
experienced intersectional discrimination
based on both gender and disability. The law
obliged those who had been subjected to
sexual violence to undergo a psychological
assessment to ascertain whether they had
the capacity to give credible evidence.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In June, parliament passed a draft law On the
Protection of Children from Harmful
Information prohibiting the dissemination of
broadly defined information that denied
“family values”, encouraged “disrespect for
parents” and promoted “non-traditional
sexual relationships”.
The draft media law (see above, Freedom of
expression) also prohibited the promotion of
“same-sex marriage”. The UN Special
Rapporteur on freedom of expression warned
that such prohibitions would result in
discrimination against individuals based on
their sexual orientation and gender identity.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In October, the CRC expressed grave concern
about the large number of children in urban
areas exposed to unsafe levels of air
pollution. Air quality in Kyrgyzstan was eight
times the WHO guideline value for particulate
matter (PM2.5). Unregulated urban
development, destruction of green spaces,
heavy dependence on coal and waste
materials for heating and increasing
automobile emissions contributed to Bishkek
being ranked among the most polluted cities
in the world, especially in winter. According
to the WHO, 32% of deaths from stroke and
ischaemic heart disease were caused by air
pollution.
1. “Kyrgyzstan: Closure of Azattyk Radio (RFE/RL) is a major blow to
media freedom”, 27 April
2. “Kyrgyzstan: Suppression of the right to freedom of peaceful
assembly in Kyrgyzstan”, 16 March
3. “Kyrgyzstan: Draft NGO law poses grave threat to thriving civil
society”, 25 October

LAOS
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Human rights defenders were under
heightened attack both at home and
abroad, targeted in a pattern of arbitrary
detention, enforced disappearance and
killings. Two Chinese dissidents were

233

deported from Laos to China, where they
faced threats of torture and other illtreatment and unfair trials due to their
activism. The government intensified its
efforts to crack down on online criticism.
Government and private sector investment
in developing hydropower facilities
continued to expand, despite concerns
about the environmental, social and
economic impacts.

BACKGROUND
Laos remained mired in a serious economic
crisis due to rising inflation and continuous
depreciation of the national currency. The
International Monetary Fund identified that
the country’s gross debt was 121.7% of GDP
in 2023 and categorized the country as “in
debt distress”. The crisis threatened people’s
food security as various basic food products,
including wheat, flour, eggs, meat and
cooking oil, reached record high prices in
June, according to the UN Food and
Agriculture Organization.
The government continued to invest in
power generation projects, including
hydropower dams, despite mounting public
debts and concerns about inadequate
compensation for affected communities.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In a September press release, the UN Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
defenders raised concerns regarding “a
pattern of serious human rights violations
targeting human rights defenders” in Laos.
Such violations, which have been ongoing for
decades, involved arbitrary detentions,
enforced disappearances, violations of the
right to a fair trial and intimidation of those
engaged in human rights work.
Anousa “Jack” Luangsouphom, a 25-yearold human rights defender, was shot in the
face and chest and severely injured by an
unidentified man at a coffee shop in the
capital, Vientiane, on 29 April. Jack was a
vocal critic of the government who ran two
Facebook pages, “Driven by the Keyboard”
and “Sor Tor Lor – the Republic”, which
featured commentaries on social,

234

environmental, economic and political issues
in Laos, such as haze pollution, the human
rights of schoolchildren and LGBTI rights.1
Lao authorities claimed that the shooting was
potentially linked to a love affair or business
dispute, but did not provide information
about any investigation into the attempted
murder.
Attacks against Lao human rights defenders
occurred both within Laos and abroad.
Bounsuan Kitiyano, a 56-year-old human
rights defender and UNHCR-recognized
refugee, was shot dead in Thailand’s Ubon
Ratchathani province on 17 May. The Lao
and Thai governments were urged to
undertake a prompt, thorough, effective,
impartial and independent investigation into
these cases and prevent further violence
against human rights defenders.2
Chinese dissidents who came to Laos to flee
persecution were targeted for deportation,
despite the risk they would face human rights
violations upon return, including torture and
other ill-treatment and unfair trial. Yang
Zewei, the founder of the Ban the Great
Firewall group which advocated against
online censorship in China, disappeared
between 31 May and 2 June in Vientiane
where he had been living in exile. Yang
Zewei’s whereabouts became known on 7
July when Chinese authorities issued an
arrest warrant and detained him at the
Hengyang Youth Detention Center in China,
for allegedly “inciting subversion of the state
power”.
In a similar incident, on 28 July Lao
authorities arrested and detained Lu
Siwei, renowned human rights lawyer from
China, while he was en route to join his family
in the USA. UN experts noted that the
detention was arbitrary. Lao authorities
refused to reveal his fate and whereabouts.
On 4 October, Amnesty International received
confirmation that Lao authorities had
returned Lu Siwei to China, despite calls for
his release from human rights organizations.3

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
The government continued to build dams for
producing hydroelectric power, with support

The State of the World’s Human Rights

from foreign investors including Chinese,
Thai and South Korean companies. In
September, the developers of Pak Beng Dam
in Oudomxai province of northern Laos
signed a power purchase agreement with the
Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand,
despite concerns expressed by human rights
groups and others about the lack of
information regarding compensation for
villagers affected by displacement. The
project’s environmental impact assessment
report suggested the construction will lead to
the resettlement of 4,700 people in 26
villages.

LATVIA

HUMAN TRAFFICKING

In July, the European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture reported allegations of
ill-treatment of people in police custody and
prisons. People in migration detention also
reported to the Committee cases of severe illtreatment by officials at the border.

Hundreds of people continued to be
trafficked into and held captive to work in
scam centres in the Golden Triangle Special
Economic Zones (GTSEZ) in north-western
Laos. Victims, mostly university graduates,
came from numerous countries and included
over 100 Sri Lankans and seven
Cambodians. They were forced to surrender
their passports on arrival and to defraud
“customers” with the sale of fake
cryptocurrencies and other scams. There
were reports of victims being held in travel
debt bondage and subjected to harsh
working conditions, including physical
punishments such as electric shocks.
The situation was exacerbated by the fact
that GTSEZs are exempt from national
economic and labour laws. Research by the
UN indicated that access to this area by law
enforcement authorities is restricted, leading
to weak governance and challenges in
guaranteeing accountability for human rights
abuses.
1. “Laos: Brazen shooting of human rights defender ‘Jack’ must be
investigated immediately”, 3 May
2. Thailand/Laos: Investigate the Killing of Lao Refugee and Put an End
to Transnational Repression of Human Rights Defenders, 26 May
3. “China: Human rights lawyer at risk of torture after return from
Laos”, 4 October

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Republic of Latvia
Legislative amendments undermined access
to asylum at the border. The law on civil
partnerships was adopted.

BACKGROUND
In August, prime minister Arturs Krišjānis
Kariņš was replaced by Evika Siliņa, who led
a new coalition government.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In June, legal amendments granted border
guards powers to “prevent” irregular entries
at the border, which in practice can result in
unlawful summary returns.1 Another
amendment – triggered in August and due to
expire in February 2024 – introduced the
option of activating an “enhanced” border
protection regime in case of
“disproportionately large” irregular crossings.
Between August 2021 and August 2023,
when a state of emergency was in force at
Latvia’s borders allowing summary returns,
border officials committed serious abuses
against refugees and migrants.
During the year, Latvia reported 13,863
“prevented” border crossings, increasing
from 5,286 in 2022.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In January, the authorities opened criminal
proceedings for smuggling against two
members of the NGO I Want to Help
Refugees, for their work assisting refugees
and migrants at the border.

235

DISCRIMINATION
As a result of legislative changes in 2022
connected to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine,
certain permanent residence permits granted
to Russian citizens were set to expire in
September. Almost 18,000 people affected
had to pass a Latvian language test as part of
the procedure to renew their residence
permits. At the end of the year, 1,213
Russian citizens were liable to be deported,
having failed to regularize their stay under the
amended law. The ombudsman observed
that this requirement risked violating the
constitutional principle of equality and nondiscrimination.
In October, media and journalists’
organizations expressed concern about a
parliament-backed proposal, that from 2026
onwards public media would only produce
content in Latvian and languages belonging
to the “European cultural space”, affecting
access to information for the large Russianspeaking population.

month and several other benefit payments
were increased.
1. “Latvia: Legal amendments would empower border guards to torture
and push back migrants and refugees”, 21 June

LEBANON
Republic of Lebanon

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS

Cross-border hostilities between the
Lebanon-based armed group Hizbullah and
Israeli forces escalated following attacks by
Palestinian armed groups in Gaza on
southern Israel on 7 October. During the
ongoing economic crisis, the Lebanese
government failed to adequately protect
people’s rights to health, social security and
housing, which had particularly devastating
impacts on marginalized groups. Impunity
remained widespread, including for those
responsible for the fatal 2020 Beirut port
explosion. The authorities escalated the use
of criminal defamation and insult laws to
stifle freedom of expression and retaliate
against critics, particularly targeting
journalists, trade unionists and activists.
Authorities systematically attacked the
rights of LGBTI people. Some authorities
stoked hostility towards refugees.

The law on civil partnership was finally
adopted in November.

BACKGROUND

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
On 30 November, Latvia ratified the Council
of Europe Convention on preventing and
combating violence against women and
domestic violence (Istanbul Convention).

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Unlike most EU countries, Latvia’s
greenhouse gas emissions in the first and
second quarters of the year were higher than
the same period in 2022. The European
Commission continued infringement
proceedings against Latvia for failure to
comply with EU standards on reduction of
emissions of certain pollutants.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Following recommendations by the UN
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights in 2021, the statutory minimum wage
was increased from EUR 500 to EUR 620 per

236

The impacts of the economic crisis that
erupted in 2019 deepened. The authorities’
failure to address the crisis left millions of
people unable to access their rights,
including to food, water, education and
health. According to UNICEF, 86% of
households were unable to afford essentials.
On 15 September, the International Monetary
Fund criticized the “lack of action” by
Lebanese authorities on urgent economic
reforms necessary to unlock a multi-billiondollar aid package.
Political deadlock hampered decisionmaking: government continued to function in
a caretaker capacity and parliament failed to
elect a president.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

From 7 October, cross-border hostilities in
southern Lebanon escalated significantly,
with shelling by Israeli forces killing at least
20 civilians, and weapons fired by Hizbullah
and other Lebanon-based armed groups at
northern Israel killing at least four Israeli
civilians.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
ISRAELI FORCES
The Israeli army fired artillery shells
containing white phosphorus in military
operations along Lebanon’s southern border
between 10 and 16 October. Amnesty
International called for an attack on Dhayra
town on 16 October to be investigated as a
possible war crime.1
Three Lebanese journalists in southern
Lebanon were killed while covering the
hostilities. On 13 October, Israeli artillery fired
into southern Lebanon killed Reuters
journalist Issam Abdallah and injured six
other journalists. Amnesty International
verified over 100 videos and photographs,
analysed weapon fragments from the site,
and interviewed nine witnesses. The findings
indicate that the group was visibly identifiable
as journalists and that the Israeli military
knew or should have known that they were
civilians, yet attacked them anyway in two
separate strikes 37 seconds apart. Amnesty
International concluded that both strikes
were likely a direct attack on civilians that
must be investigated as a war crime.2 On 21
November, reporter Farah Omar and
cameraman Rabih Maamari from the TV
station Al Mayadeen, and their local guide,
Hussein Akil, were killed in a strike in Teir
Harfa village, Tyre district.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The government failed to alleviate the
impacts of the economic crisis on people’s
right to health. After it lifted subsidies on
most medications in 2021 and 2022, prices
rocketed. As a result, demand for free or lowcost medication provided by public primary
healthcare centres increased drastically,
while government funding of the centres

The State of the World’s Human Rights

decreased, denying people access to vital
medication. Marginalized groups suffered
disproportionately.
An Amnesty International investigation
published in June found that a rapid rise in
the number of deaths in custody between
2019 and 2022 was partly due to a lack of
adequate healthcare.3 Prisons had too few
medical staff and lacked basic medication,
and the government failed to pay private and
public hospitals to treat prisoners, sometimes
leading hospitals to turn away prisoners even
when emergency treatment was required.

RIGHT TO SOCIAL SECURITY
The government still had not adopted a
universal social protection programme or
taken the steps necessary to fund such a
programme. A significant portion of the
population, particularly those working in the
informal sector, had no form of social
protection, and the value of assistance for
those eligible was often inadequate to meet
basic needs. Lebanon’s limited povertytargeting cash assistance programmes were
unable to help a large number of people in
dire need.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
The impact of the February earthquakes in
Türkiye and Syria was felt across Lebanon.
Many residents, particularly those in
Lebanon’s coastal city of Tripoli, already lived
in buildings at risk of collapse. Government
promises to assess the structural integrity of
buildings and cover the cost of alternative
housing for three months for people whose
homes were deemed to be at risk did not
materialize. On 16 October, a building in
Mansouriyeh town in the Metn district of
Mount Lebanon governorate collapsed, killing
eight people.

IMPUNITY
Impunity remained widespread.
The investigation into the 2020 Beirut port
explosion remained suspended since
December 2021 due to legal complaints filed
against the investigation’s judges by
politicians summoned for interrogation or

237

charged in relation to the case.4 On 25
January, two days after lead judge Tarek Bitar
tried to resume the investigation, the general
prosecutor filed charges against him,
including “usurping power”, and ordered the
release of everyone detained in connection
with the explosion. The Beirut Bar
Association and the Lebanese Judges
Association said the decision to release all
remaining suspects was illegal. In March,
Australia delivered a joint statement on behalf
of 38 states at the UN Human Rights Council
expressing concern that the domestic
investigation into the explosion had been
“hampered by systemic obstruction,
interference, intimidation, and a political
impasse.”
There was no meaningful progress in the
investigation into the assassination of activist
and intellectual Lokman Slim, who was found
shot dead on 4 February 2021 in his car in
southern Lebanon.5 On 2 February, UN
human rights experts expressed deep
concern at the lack of progress to ensure
accountability for the crime.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Authorities increasingly used criminal
defamation and insult laws to stifle criticism
and retaliate against, harass or intimidate
their critics.
Amnesty International documented the
cases of 10 journalists, trade unionists and
activists summoned for interrogation
pursuant to criminal insult and defamation
cases filed against them by powerful
individuals because of their criticism.
Security and military agencies who
summoned and interrogated those targeted
failed to safeguard their due process rights
and engaged in intimidating behaviour, such
as threats of detention or pressure to sign
pledges to stop criticizing the complainant.
The defamation and insult provisions appear
in the Penal Code, the Publications Law and
the Military Code of Justice, and are
punishable by up to three years’
imprisonment.
On 11 July, journalist Dima Sadek was
sentenced to one year in prison and fined on

238

criminal charges of defamation and
incitement after she criticized on Twitter (now
known as X) members of a political party.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Authorities systematically attacked the
human rights of LGBTI people and incited
violence against them.
In July, nine parliamentarians submitted a
draft law to repeal Article 534 of the Penal
Code, which punishes “all sexual intercourse
contrary to the order of nature” with up to
one year’s imprisonment and a fine. In
response, in August, a parliamentarian and
the minister of culture submitted two
separate draft laws that would explicitly
criminalize consensual same-sex sexual
relations and the “promotion of
homosexuality”.
On 23 August, members of Soldiers of God,
a Christian radical group, attacked people
attending a drag event in a bar in Beirut and
threatened further violence against LGBTI
people. The Internal Security Forces arrived
during the attack, but did not arrest anyone.
On 25 August, 18 media organizations
issued a joint statement against the
crackdown on freedoms, including the
targeting of LGBTI people.
On 5 September, the Coalition to Defend
Freedom of Expression in Lebanon, which
comprises 15 Lebanese and international
organizations including Amnesty
International, urged the authorities to
immediately scrap the proposed anti-LGBTI
laws and end the attacks on rights and
freedoms.6

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Lebanon continued to host the largest
number of refugees per capita globally, with
an estimated 1.5 million Syrian refugees,
including 795,322 registered with UNHCR,
the UN refugee agency, and 13,715 refugees
of other nationalities. According to UNHCR,
90% of Syrian refugees were living in extreme
poverty.
In the first half of the year, the hostile
environment for refugees was exacerbated by
an alarming rise in anti-refugee rhetoric, in

The State of the World’s Human Rights

some cases fuelled by local authorities and
politicians.
In April and May, the Lebanese Armed
Forces raided houses of Syrian refugees,
most of them registered with or known to
UNHCR, across Lebanon, including in Mount
Lebanon, Jounieh, Qob Elias and Bourj
Hammoud, and immediately deported most
of them. Some were arrested or disappeared
upon their return to Syria. Deportees told
Amnesty International they were not afforded
the right to challenge their deportation or
argue their case for protection.
On 11 May, 20 national and international
organizations called on the authorities to “halt
summary deportations to Syria, which are in
breach of the principle of non-refoulement”.
They also called on the international
community to step up its assistance to
Lebanon and resettle more refugees living in
Lebanon.
In September, the Lebanese Armed Forces
raided refugee camps in the Bekaa region
and Arsal town and confiscated internet
boxes, solar panels and batteries.

LESOTHO

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY

Lebanese authorities failed to transition away
from heavy fuel oil to power its plants in line
with the government’s 2022 Electricity Plan.
Meanwhile, widespread state electricity
shortages forced people to rely on expensive
and highly polluting private diesel generators.
1. “Lebanon: Evidence of Israel’s unlawful use of white phosphorus in
southern Lebanon as cross-border hostilities escalate”, 31 October
2. “Lebanon: Deadly Israeli attack on journalists must be investigated
as a war crime”, 7 December
3. “Lebanon: Sharp increase of deaths in custody must be a wake-up
call for authorities”, 7 June
4. “Lebanon: Unacceptable lack of justice, truth and reparation three
years after Beirut blast”, 3 August
5. “Lebanon: Killers of activist Lokman Slim must be brought to
justice”, 3 February
6. “Lebanon: Attack on freedoms targets LGBTI people repressive
legislation; unlawful crackdown”, 5 September

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Kingdom of Lesotho
Security forces suppressed peaceful
demonstrations at the Polihali Dam and
surrounding areas. The government
proposed a motion in the national assembly
to reintroduce cybercrime legislation, which
threatens to undermine the right to freedom
of expression, and to expand enforcement
powers. The right to privacy was violated.
There were suspicious deaths in custody.
Women continued to face discrimination.
An overnight curfew imposed during May
threatened livelihoods.

BACKGROUND
In July, the 138th session of the UN Human
Rights Committee raised concerns regarding
the establishment of the Human Rights
Commission, the arbitrary use of states of
emergency, and past human rights violations
and impunity.

On 23 May, Lesotho Defence Force officers
suppressed peaceful protests by
communities affected by the construction of
the Polihali Dam in the district of Mokhotlong.
The protests, which took place during the
Lesotho Highlands Water Project Phase II
launch, were against inadequate and delayed
compensation, lack of consultation regarding
the construction and other related issues.
Also in May, the government tabled a
motion in the national assembly to reinstate
the Computer Crime and Cybersecurity Bill
2022. Civil society organizations and some
media houses sought the bill’s withdrawal
pending further consultations. Civil society
members argued that, if enacted in its
current form, the bill could shrink civic and
political spaces and media freedom; and that
some of its provisions could expand
enforcement powers and stifle the right to
freedom of expression and access to
information.

239

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In May, while the prime minister was
overseas, a minister in his office signed
warrants authorizing National Security
Service (NSS) officers to seize and retain
mobile phones and other sources of
information belonging to opposition
politicians Machesetsa Mofomobe and
Moeketsi Shale. The NSS accused them of
involvement in the killing of radio personality
Ralikonelo Joki. Following this, the high court
declared Section 26 of the National Security
Act, which allows for such executive
warrants, unconstitutional.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
On 20 May, Ntabejane Kanono, a former
soldier, was reported dead at Maseru
Maximum Security Prison. The preliminary
autopsy reports suggested that he may have
died of poisoning. Ntabejane Kanono had
been convicted of fraud by the Court-Martial
Court after he, along with other soldiers, sued
the army’s commander, seeking
compensation for alleged torture and
unlawful arrests against them in 2015,
following which the army accused them of
mutiny.
On 29 July, Mahloko Mohlori, aged 60, died
in police custody at Thaba-Tseka Police
Station after being arrested for a traffic
offence. The government autopsy report
recorded poison as the possible cause of
death, but the family doctor’s report
confirmed the cause of death as respiratory
failure.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In December, correctional officers severely
assaulted at least 10 detainees (nine of
whom were soldiers) at the Maseru Maximum
Security Prison. One of them, civilian Tlotliso
Bereng, suffered serious spinal injuries
during the attack and was later transferred to
South Africa for medical treatment.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
The UN Human Rights Committee concluded
that the application of customary laws permit
discrimination against women, particularly

240

relating to inheritance of property, marriage,
nationality, and access to land and
chieftainship.

RIGHT TO WORK
Between 16 and 26 May, the Commissioner
of Police imposed a nationwide curfew
between 10pm and 4am to curb violent
crime. The step was prompted by the killing
of Ralikonelo Joki (see above, Right to
privacy). The law society and business
representatives criticized the curfew for its
adverse effect on night-time business
operations, including nightclubs, restaurants,
bars, street vending and hawking, which had
already suffered the economic impact of
Covid-19.

LIBYA
State of Libya
Militias, armed groups and security forces
across Libya intensified their suppression of
dissent, and attacks on civil society.
Thousands of people remained arbitrarily
detained in conditions violating the
absolute prohibition of torture and other illtreatment, while hundreds of peaceful
protesters, activists, journalists and others
were arrested solely because of the peaceful
exercise of their human rights. Militias and
armed groups killed and wounded civilians
and destroyed civilian infrastructure during
intensified armed hostilities. Armed groups
forced thousands of people out of their
homes, including in reprisal for their
alleged affiliation or to appropriate their
lands. Amid pervasive impunity and ongoing
funding and integration of abusive militias
and armed groups in state institutions, calls
for accountability grew in the aftermath of
the staggering loss of life, destruction and
forced displacement in the wake of Storm
Daniel. Discrimination and violence against
women and girls remained pervasive. LGBTI
individuals continued to be subjected to
arbitrary arrests, unjust prosecution and
other abuse. Ethnic minorities continued to
face discrimination and barriers to

The State of the World’s Human Rights

accessing health, education and other
services. Refugees and migrants, including
those intercepted at sea by EU-backed
coastguards and armed groups, were
subjected to torture and other ill-treatment,
extortion and forced labour; thousands were
forcibly expelled without due process.

BACKGROUND
Libya’s political stalemate continued as rival
factions failed to agree a new unity
government or set new dates for long-delayed
presidential and parliamentary elections.
In June, a leaked report by the
Administrative Control Authority pointed to
80,000 administrative and financial violations
across state institutions under the Tripolibased Government of National Unity (GNU)
in 2022. In October, Libya’s audit bureau
released its annual report revealing
widespread embezzlement of public funds in
2022.
In August, the Libyan Central Bank
announced reunification after a decade-long
division. The move followed struggles over its
control and the shutting down of oil fields by
actors affiliated to the Libyan Arab Armed
Forces (LAAF) armed group.
In September, Storm Daniel triggered the
collapse in Derna city of two dams, neither of
which had been maintained for decades,
leaving about 4,540 people dead and 8,500
missing, and causing widespread destruction
and displacement.
Also in September, the UN Panel of Experts
on Libya reported that foreign fighters and
private military companies were continuing to
pose a severe threat to security in Libya and
that the arms embargo, in force since 2011,
was being violated with impunity.

ARBITRARY DETENTION, UNLAWFUL
DEPRIVATION OF LIBERTY AND UNFAIR
TRIALS
Thousands of people, including children,
were arbitrarily arrested and detained by
militias, armed groups and security forces
solely for their actual or suspected political or
tribal affiliations and/or opinions; or following

The State of the World’s Human Rights

grossly unfair trials, including by military
courts; or without legal basis.
According to the GNU Ministry of Justice, in
October over 18,000 people were held in 31
prisons nationwide, twothirds of them without
trial. Thousands more were held in detention
facilities controlled by militias and armed
groups.
In May, Libya handed over to Tunisia four
Tunisian women and their five children who
had been arbitrarily detained without charge
or trial since 2016 solely for being relatives of
killed fighters with the Islamic State (IS)
armed group.
Attacks on judges, prosecutors and lawyers
continued. Deterrence Apparatus for
Combating Terrorism and Organized Crime
(DACTO) militiamen continued to arbitrarily
detain Farouq Ben Saeed, a military
prosecutor from Tripoli, abducted in June.1

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment remained
systemic in prisons and other detention
facilities across Libya. On camera
“confessions” extracted under torture
continued to be published online and on TV.
At least 15 people died in custody across
Libya amid reports of physical torture and
deliberate denial of medical care, including in
facilities controlled by DACTO, the Internal
Security Agency (ISA) in Derna, the Stability
Support Apparatus (SSA) militia, and the
Interior Ministry’s Directorate for Combating
Illegal Migration (DCIM). In August, the body
of Walid Al-Tarhouni was found in Tripoli’s
Abu Salim Hospital morgue with signs of
torture, according to a forensic report. SSA
militiamen had abducted him in July.
Detainees were held in conditions violating
the absolute prohibition of torture and other
ill-treatment, including overcrowding; lack of
hygiene, sufficient food and access to
sunlight; and denial of family visits.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Militias, armed groups and security forces
across Libya further stifled civic space,
including through arbitrary arrests, summons
for interrogation and other forms of

241

harassment of Libyan and foreign NGO staff
and humanitarian workers.
Between March and May, the GNU issued
multiple decrees that threatened to dissolve
NGOs unless they complied with the
repressive Law No. 19 of 2001 on NGOs.
In April, the Department of Criminal
Investigation allied to the LAAF arbitrarily
arrested five members of the pro-Saif al-Islam
al-Gaddafi Together for the Homeland party
in Sirte city, and held them without charge or
trial until their release in October.
In May, the ISA in Tripoli arrested and aired
torture-tainted forced confessions of Libyan
contractors of the Italian NGO Ara Pacis
“admitting” to working for the resettlement of
sub-Saharan African nationals in southern
Libya, amid rising smear attacks on NGOs
working on refugee and migrant rights. Ara
Pacis’s activities in Libya were suspended
indefinitely.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Militias and armed groups arbitrarily arrested,
detained and threatened hundreds of
activists, journalists, protesters and others
solely for exercising their rights to freedom of
expression and peaceful assembly.
In February, the ISA in Benghazi arrested
singer Ahlam al-Yamani and content creator
Haneen al-Abdali for “offending the traditions
of Libya”, accusing them of violating Law No.
5 of 2022 on Cybercrimes. They were
released in April without charge or trial.
During the year, the ISA in Tripoli arbitrarily
arrested at least one child, four women and
22 men solely for exercising their human
rights, and published some of their forced
“confessions” alongside claims of their
involvement in activities contravening “Libyan
values”, including “apostasy”,
“homosexuality”, proselytizing and feminism.
Eighteen remained detained awaiting trial,
including on the charge of “apostasy”, which
carries the death penalty.
Between May and September, in the cities
of Tripoli, Benghazi and al-Zawiya, militias
and armed groups unlawfully fired live
ammunition into the air to disperse peaceful

242

protests against their grip on power and the
deteriorating security situation.
The Tariq Ben Zeyad (TBZ) armed group
arrested at least nine protesters who had
gathered at Derna’s Sahaba Mosque on 18
September calling for accountability and
resignations of politicians in the wake of the
catastrophic floods. Most were released
within 10 days, but a protest organizer and
one other activist remained detained at the
end of the year.2
In October, investigations by the European
Investigative Collaborations revealed that
corporate entities within the “Intellexa
alliance” had sold surveillance technology to
the LAAF in 2020.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS
During sporadic localized clashes, militias
and armed groups violated international
humanitarian law, including by carrying out
indiscriminate attacks and destroying civilian
infrastructure and private property.
In January, a 10-year-old boy, Abdel Moez
Masoud Oqab, died after the detonation of
unexploded ordnance left from the 2019
armed conflict in Tripoli’s Qasr Bin Ghashir
district.
In May, the Tripoli-based Ministry of
Defence carried out air strikes on targets in
al-Zawiya city and other locations in western
Libya, with the declared aim of rooting out
criminal networks, leading to injuries of
civilians and destruction of civilian
infrastructure, including a medical clinic.
In August, fighting in residential Tripoli
neighbourhoods, including Ain Zara, Firnaj
and Al-Tibbi, between DACTO and the 444
Brigade using explosive weapons with widearea effects, killed at least 45 people and
injured over 164, including civilians.
Clashes between 6 and 8 October in
Benghazi between the LAAF and fighters
loyal to Al-Mahdi Al-Barghathi, a former
minister of defence, left at least five people
dead and more injured, including civilians,
amid an internet shutdown imposed by the
LAAF. LAAF affiliates also took hostage 36
women and 13 children to compel Al-Mahdi
Al-Barghathi and his son to hand themselves

The State of the World’s Human Rights

over. The fate of Al-Mahdi Al-Barghathi and
33 of his relatives and supporters following
their abductions remained unknown at the
end of the year.
In September and October, the TBZ and
other armed groups destroyed civilian homes
in apparent reprisal for their owners’ political
affiliations, including in Qasr Abu Hadi, south
of Sirte, and Benghazi.

IMPUNITY
Officials and commanders of powerful militia
and armed groups enjoyed near total
impunity for crimes under international law
and serious human rights violations
committed in 2023 and previous years.
In March, the UN Independent Fact-Finding
Mission (FFM) on Libya concluded that
“there are grounds to believe State security
forces and armed militia groups have
committed a wide array of war crimes and
crimes against humanity”. Despite this, the
UN Human Rights Council ended the FFM’s
mandate and adopted a capacity-building
resolution with no monitoring and
investigative component.
In May, the GNU prime minister signed a
decree integrating members of militias from
Tripoli, Misrata city and other parts of western
Libya into a new security force, the National
Apparatus of Support Forces, without any
vetting.
Also in May, the ICC prosecutor announced
four new arrest warrants in connection with
the Libya situation, but did not name the
suspects.
In December, the Tripoli-based public
prosecutor concluded investigations in
relation to the collapse of the Derna dams
and referred 16 middle-ranking officials to
the Accusation Chamber for negligence and
mismanagement, amid concerns over the
transparency and independence of the
investigation and its failure to address the
responsibility of senior officials and powerful
commanders of armed groups.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

DISCRIMINATION
WOMEN AND GIRLS
Women faced discrimination in law and
practice, including in relation to marriage,
divorce, inheritance, employment, the right to
impart their nationality to their children, and
political office. Women politicians, activists
and municipal councillors faced gendered
threats and insults, including online.
From April, the ISA in Tripoli required
women travelling alone to complete a form on
their reasons for travelling abroad without a
male “guardian” (mahram).
Authorities failed to protect women and girls
from violence by armed groups, militias, their
family members and other non-state actors;
in some cases, militias prevented survivors
from lodging judicial complaints.
LGBTI PEOPLE
Consensual same-sexual relations remained
criminalized. The ISA in Tripoli and other
armed groups continued to arrest individuals
for their actual or perceived sexual orientation
and/or gender identity, amid reports of torture
and other ill-treatment. In her May report, the
UN Special Rapporteur on violence against
women and girls stated that GNU officials
had said there were no LGBTI individuals in
Libya.
In September, the ISA in Benghazi
confiscated rainbow-coloured toys, clothing
and other items from stores, claiming that
these encourage “homosexuality”.
ETHNIC MINORITIES AND INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
Members of the Tabu and Tuareg
communities without national identity cards
owing to discriminatory laws and regulations
governing Libyan citizenship faced barriers in
accessing education and health services.
In August, LAAF-affiliated armed groups
raided the “Chinese Company”
neighbourhood in Umm Al-Aranib, looting
private belongings and arbitrarily arresting
Tabu men, according to local activists and
politicians. The attack took place against a
backdrop of rising racist and xenophobic
rhetoric against Tabus.
INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE
Over 170,664 people remained internally
displaced, according to the International

243

Organization for Migration (IOM). They
included 44,862 people who lost their homes
in the wake of Storm Daniel, with most
sheltering with relatives or renting private
accommodation amid need for basic services
and trauma support.
From March, the TBZ evicted thousands of
Benghazi residents from their homes,
including from the historic city centre,
without compensation, and harassed those
who protested.
People displaced during previous armed
hostilities in Benghazi, Derna and other parts
of eastern Libya as well as Murzuk town in
south-west Libya were unable to return to
their areas of origin, owing to a risk of
persecution or retaliation by armed groups.
In January, militias forced dozens of families
of Tawerghans, internally displaced since the
2011 armed conflict, out of informal
settlements where they had been sheltering
around Tripoli and Bani Walid city. LAAF and
affiliated armed groups prevented hundreds
of internally displaced Tawerghans from
returning to seven camps for internally
displaced people in and around Benghazi,
where they had lived for years and from
where they were told to evacuate on 10
September ahead of Storm Daniel. Scores
were forced to return to the city of Tawergha
despite a lack of services and employment
opportunities.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Security forces, armed groups, militias and
non-state actors committed widespread and
systematic human rights violations and
abuses against refugees and migrants with
impunity.
According to the IOM, as of 25 November,
947 migrants had died and a further 1,256
had gone missing at sea off the Libyan coast
in 2023. In addition, 15,057 were intercepted
at sea and forcibly returned to Libya by EUbacked coastguards in western Libya as well
as the LAAF-affiliated Libyan Special Naval
Forces and the TBZ in eastern Libya.
On 19 August, the TBZ intercepted in
Malta’s search and rescue area a boat
carrying about 110 people, mainly Lebanese

244

and Syrian nationals. The boat had departed
from Akkar in Lebanon heading for Italy, and
disembarked them in Benghazi. Five of the
people from the boat said they were
arbitrarily detained in a large tent in Benghazi
port and that some, including children, were
subjected to forced labour.
From late April, security agencies across
Libya carried out mass arrests targeting
thousands of refugees and migrants,
including those with valid visas or who had
registered with UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency.
As of September, 3,913 foreign nationals
were arbitrarily detained in DCIM-run
detention centres, while thousands of others
were held by the SSA and other militias and
armed groups. They were held in cruel and
inhuman conditions and subjected to torture
and other ill-treatment, including sexual
violence, extortion of ransoms to secure their
freedom, and denial of adequate medical
care.
From July, Tunisian authorities forcibly
expelled thousands of refugees and migrants
to deserted areas on the border between
Tunisia and Libya, leaving them without food
or water and resulting in reported deaths (see
Tunisia entry).
Armed groups affiliated to the LAAF forcibly
expelled over 22,000 refugees and migrants
towards Chad, Egypt, Niger and Sudan,
without giving them the opportunity to
challenge their deportation or seek
international protection.

DEATH PENALTY
Libya’s legislation retains the death penalty
for a wide range of offences. In July, the
public prosecutor, Al-Siddiq Al-Sour,
announced the establishment of a committee
to examine the resumption of executions,
which had been halted since 2011.
Death sentences continued to be passed
after grossly unfair trials, including by military
courts. In May, a court in Misrata sentenced
23 people to death for their involvement with
IS, after a trial marred by allegations of
torture and enforced disappearances.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Libya had still not ratified the Paris
Agreement, nor submitted mitigation or
adaptation strategies, while announcing plans
to double fossil fuel production by 2030. The
country’s poor preparedness for the impacts
of climate change was laid bare by the vast
loss of life in the wake of Storm Daniel.
Officials in eastern Libya provided Derna
residents with conflicting instructions on
whether to evacuate or respect a curfew
ahead of the flooding. The World
Meteorological Organization deemed that
deaths could have been avoided with proper
warnings and evacuations. According to a
study published by the World Weather
Attribution, similar extreme events have
“become up to 50 times more likely and up
to 50% more intense compared to a 1.2◦C
cooler climate.”
1. “Libya: Military prosecutor forcibly disappeared: Farouq Alsqidig
Abdulsalam Ben Saeed”, 24 July
2. “Libya: Lift restrictions on media and facilitate relief efforts in wake
of catastrophic floods”, 21 September

LITHUANIA
Republic of Lithuania
The authorities continued to summarily
return refugees and migrants to Belarus,
and passed legislation to this effect. The
Constitutional Court struck down legislation
on detention of asylum seekers and
migrants. Belarusian and Russian nationals
faced increasing obstacles in renewing
residency permits and other documentation.
Same-sex unions were still not legalized.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Lithuania continued to host at least 52,262
people who had fled Ukraine following
Russia’s full-scale invasion. However, other
refugees and migrants, mostly from the
Middle East and Africa, were pushed back to
Belarus, with at least 2,599 people being
subjected to summary forced returns, despite
the risk of torture and other ill-treatment by

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Belarusian authorities. In May, upon the
government’s proposal, parliament approved
legal amendments enshrining the power of
border guards to carry out pushbacks, in
violation of international law. The Lithuanian
authorities completed the construction of a
physical barrier along the land border with
Belarus and insisted that asylum seekers
apply for protection at official border crossing
points. However, in August, the government
closed two of the six crossings and
announced the future closure of another two.
In June, the Constitutional Court found that
provisions of the Law on the Legal Status of
Foreigners, introduced in 2021 and April
2023 and providing for the automatic
detention of asylum seekers and those
considered irregular migrants, violated Article
20 of the constitution, protecting liberty. In
December, parliament approved legislative
amendments introducing some guarantees
against arbitrary detention and limiting the
maximum length of detention to five months.
The measure did not provide for reparation to
the thousands of people who had suffered
prolonged arbitrary detention between 2021
and 2023. At the end of the year, 38 asylum
seekers and migrants were being detained in
Lithuania.
In June, an inquiry by the Lithuanian Bar
Association confirmed serious malpractice in
the provision of legal aid to refugees and
migrants.
In September, the Ministry of Interior
reported a decline in attempted crossings
from Belarus, but also an increase in the
number of refugees and migrants entering via
Latvia. The Lithuanian authorities carried out
checks at the Latvian border and summarily
removed 1,072 refugees and migrants –
including unaccompanied minors – to Latvia.
During the second half of the year, the
Ministry of Interior designated a total of 1,654
Belarusian and Russian citizens living in
Lithuania as a threat to Lithuania’s national
security, partly based on a questionnaire
which asked for individuals’ views on the
Russian aggression in Ukraine. As a result,
many Russian and Belarusian nationals were
refused asylum, visas, renewal of residence

245

permits, or continued Lithuanian citizenship.
In August, Olga Karach, a Belarusian activist
based in Lithuania, was declared a threat to
national security and refused asylum, and
only allowed to remain on a temporary
residence permit.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In January, the European Court of Human
Rights found that the Lithuanian authorities
had acted unlawfully by censoring a fairy-tale
book depicting, among others, same-sex
relationships. A legislative proposal to repeal
the prohibition of the promotion of nontraditional family models was voted down by
parliament in November, and another, to
provide some limited rights to LGBTI couples
through the introduction of gender-neutral
civil unions, had not been adopted by
parliament by the end of the year.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
The year was marked by extreme weather
associated with climate change, including
drought, heatwaves and violent storms, which
caused damage to livelihoods and health.
Lithuania had no clear plan to phase out
fossil fuels, and long-term emissions
reduction proceeded at a slower pace than
the EU average.

MADAGASCAR
Republic of Madagascar
Detention conditions remained poor.
Restrictions on the rights to freedom of
expression, association and peaceful
assembly persisted; and security forces
used excessive force to disperse protesters.
The state authorities failed to protect
environmental human rights defenders from
threats, intimidation, harassment and
arbitrary arrest. Extreme weather events and
drought led to widespread internal
displacement, and levels of food insecurity
increased. Women, LGBTI people and
persons with albinism suffered
discrimination.

246

BACKGROUND
President Andry Rajoelina’s re-election was
confirmed by the Supreme Constitutional
Court on 1 December.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
Detention conditions, including in prisons,
police and gendarmerie stations and
psychiatric facilities, remained poor. In May,
the UN Subcommittee on Prevention of
Torture visited Malagasy prisons and
reiterated its concerns about overcrowding.
The National Independent Commission for
Human Rights, serving as the National
Preventive Mechanism (a body that monitors
and makes recommendations to protect
detainees’ rights) remained understaffed and
under-resourced. This hindered its ability to
monitor and improve the human rights
situation in detention facilities.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY AND
ASSOCIATION
During the pre-election period, security
forces halted the electoral campaigning
activities of opposition parties. On 4 April, the
Ministry of Interior declared that political
meetings must be held indoors, and that all
public demonstrations should be authorized
under Order 60-082 of 13 August 1960. This
law, which was applied throughout the
electoral campaigning period, fell short of
international standards on the right to
peaceful assembly. The purpose of the
ministry’s declaration was to curtail this right
for opposition parties. During the
campaigning period between 10 October –
when electoral campaigning for presidential
elections began – and 16 November,
violations to the rights to freedom of
expression and peaceful assembly were
documented on at least 20 occasions.
In October, the Prefecture of Antananarivo
banned opposition party protesters from
entering several key areas of the capital.
Journalists were arrested and presidential
candidates were injured, and there were
reports that political activists and bystanders
were arbitrarily detained. The authorities
misused criminal law to arrest, detain or

The State of the World’s Human Rights

threaten people expressing dissenting views.
OHCHR, the UN human rights office,
expressed concern at the deterioration in the
human rights situation, noting the security
forces’ use of unnecessary and
disproportionate force against protesters.
Environmental activists’ rights to peaceful
assembly and association were also violated.
The authorities failed to protect them from
threats and attacks by other community
members or security forces. On 5 July,
environmental human rights defender
Angélique Decampe received death threats
from another community member in
connection with her work to safeguard the
Vohibola forest from poachers and
deforestation. Also in July, security forces
arrested over 80 protesters from the
Association for the Struggle of the South
(LUSUD) in the Anosy region when they
blocked a road to prevent mining company
Rio Tinto (operating under the subsidiary
name of QIT Madagascar Minerals) from
continuing its extraction activities. They were
all released by August. However, arrest
warrants remained pending against LUSUD
leaders Eugène Chrétien and Laurent
Manjary, who had not been arrested during
the protest.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
On 23 March, the authorities arrested Lôla
Rasoamaharo, the owner of La Gazette de la
Grande Ile newspaper, on charges of
extortion, defamation, threats and insults,
after they raided the newspaper’s office and
confiscated materials. This followed a
protracted dispute between Lôla
Rasoamaharo and the mayor of
Antananarivo, conducted through their
respective newspapers.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
According to the National Office of Risk and
Disaster Management, Cyclone Cheneso
resulted in the displacement of approximately
90,870 people and claimed at least 33 lives
in the south-eastern region in January. It was
followed by Cyclone Freddy, which destroyed
cash crops and led to increased levels of food

The State of the World’s Human Rights

insecurity in the region in February.
Humanitarian aid delivery to affected areas
was hindered by the damage caused to
infrastructure, including health centres, and
the remoteness of affected areas.
The situation in the drought-stricken Grand
South region somewhat stabilized during the
year, and there was an improvement in
access to humanitarian aid. However, food
security remained precarious. Local
populations’ dependence on humanitarian
assistance rendered them more vulnerable to
additional climate change-related extreme
weather events. During the year, the
government implemented measures to
prevent disasters caused by cyclones, issuing
alerts and evacuating affected areas.
However, it did not receive the necessary
funding from developed states as required
under the Paris Agreement, making it difficult
for Madagascar to adapt to climate change
and address the resulting losses and
damages.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S
RIGHTS
Internal displacement resulting from slow
onset events like rising sea levels and
increasing temperatures, as well as rapid
onset events, became more pronounced.
According to the Internal Displacement
Monitoring Centre (an international NGO) and
media reports, over 2,000 people from the
Grand South region relocated to urban and
rural areas in the north to escape the
drought. The absence of government
protection for internally displaced people
resulted in reported cases of sexual violence
against women, human trafficking, and
tensions between host communities and
internally displaced people, often linked to
disputes over land use.

DISCRIMINATION
Women and girls, LGBTI people and persons
with albinism were among groups facing
discrimination and inequality.
Women’s reproductive rights and access to
healthcare was restricted; abortion remained
illegal in all circumstances. Gender-based

247

discrimination was pervasive and
disproportionately affected women and girls,
particularly in educational settings, where,
according to media reports, preconceived
ideas about gender roles led to inequality and
discrimination against girls.
LGBTI people experienced discrimination
and marginalization in law and practice. In
May, a 56-year-old transgender woman was
subjected to physical violence by military
personnel on the basis of her identity.
Persons with albinism were persistently
targeted; they were subjected to ritual killings
and attacks. There were at least 12
documented cases of abduction of persons
with albinism during the year, motivated by
false beliefs that the body parts of persons
with albinism can be used to bring good luck.

MALAWI
Republic of Malawi
The rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly were restricted.
Hundreds of refugees and asylum seekers
were arrested and forced to relocate to
camps and abandon their livelihoods.
Violent attacks on persons with albinism
increased. LGBTI people faced
discrimination. Cyclones left hundreds dead
and over 659,000 displaced; women were
at increased risk of gender-based violence
in displacement camps. There were signs
that the cholera outbreak was easing.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
On 30 August, former MP Bon Kalindo was
arrested when he delivered a court order to
the district commissioner’s office. The order
confirmed that a protest planned for the
following week could proceed, after it was
blocked by the district council. He was
released the next day after a court
suspended his arrest warrant. On 7
September, he led peaceful protesters on a
march to State House to deliver a petition
calling for the president’s resignation. When

248

another group threw stones at the peaceful
protesters, police dispersed the
demonstration with tear gas.
JOURNALISTS
In May, the president told journalists that he
was committed to upholding the constitution
by respecting freedom of expression. Two
weeks later, Francis Mzindiko, a Times Group
newspaper journalist, was attacked by
supporters of the ruling Malawi Congress
Party after he filmed them fighting with
members of another party in Blantyre.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In March, the government ordered all
refugees and asylum seekers to return to
Dzaleka refugee camp by 15 April or face
enforced relocation. In May, police arrested
hundreds of them from their homes and
businesses in the capital Lilongwe, relocating
them to the camp. Police confiscated
property and demanded bribes from some of
them, and many had to abandon their
livelihoods. Dzaleka camp, believed to host
over 50,000 refugees, had a capacity for
12,000, while around 8,000 lived just outside
the camp. UNHCR, the UN refugee agency,
said healthcare services and water and
sanitation facilities were inadequate.

DISCRIMINATION
PERSONS WITH ALBINISM
Crimes against persons with albinism,
including reports of attempted abductions,
physical attacks and desecration of graves,
increased. In May, Ajasi Salim from the
southern village of M’boola sustained injuries
in an attack. In June, Tony Robert’s grave
was violated in M’maliha village in Blantyre;
police and local community members
confirmed that only his torso remained.
Standing Voice, a rights NGO, documented
three attempted abductions of children under
10, including a one-year-old. Only one arrest
was made in all reported cases.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In July, religious leaders held national
demonstrations, attended by cabinet
ministers, to protest against the

The State of the World’s Human Rights

decriminalization of consensual same-sex
sexual conduct. The protests were triggered
by a case before the constitutional court in
which Wim Akster and Jana Gonani, a local
transgender woman, challenged penal code
provisions criminalizing such behaviour, and
under which Jana Gonani had been
convicted in 2021. The case was adjourned
in August and no judgment delivered by the
end of the year. LGBTI rights organization
Nyasa Rainbow Alliance (NRA) said that the
participation of influential individuals in the
protests led to increased discrimination in
relation to LGBTI people’s access to basic
services, including healthcare. Speech
advocating hatred against NRA staff and
LGBTI people also increased.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
On 13 March, a state of disaster was
declared when Cyclone Freddy struck for the
second time in one month. At least 679
people died and 659,278 were displaced by
heavy rains that destroyed roads, homes,
crops and livestock in the south. The Disaster
Management Affairs and the Department of
Climate Change and Meteorological Services
(government bodies) took steps to increase
public awareness about the impact of heavy
rainfall, targeting flood-prone areas. The
government relocated at-risk households to
areas less vulnerable to flooding.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
High rates of unemployment, poverty and
natural disasters exposed women to sexual
exploitation, trafficking and gender-based
violence. The Malawi Human Rights
Commission recorded abuses including
gender-based violence (54), sexual
exploitation (23) and child marriage (34)
against women and girls displaced into
camps by Cyclone Freddy.
In July, the government disclosed that 18
women had been repatriated to Malawi out of
over 300 who had been lured with fake job
offers to Oman, where they suffered abuses
including rape, torture, appalling conditions
and poor pay.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The government took measures, including
monitoring water quality and promoting
public awareness, to address the cholera
outbreak. In August, it said that there had
been no new reported cases for 14 days in
the 26 affected districts since March 2022.
As of 15 December, the outbreak had
affected 59,114 people, of whom 1,771 died.

MALAYSIA
Malaysia
The government failed to fulfil
commitments to reform laws restricting the
right to freedom of expression and
continued to use repressive laws to silence
critical voices and prevent peaceful protest.
Punitive treatment of refugees and migrants
continued, including indefinite detention
and forced return in violation of the
principle of non-refoulement. Further
custodial deaths were recorded. The
mandatory death penalty was abolished and
1,020 death row prisoners became eligible
for resentencing.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The government did not act on commitments
made during the 2022 general election
campaign to reform laws that curtailed
freedom of expression and to adopt a
Freedom of Information Act.
Authorities continued to use repressive laws
– including the Communications and
Multimedia Act; provisions of the Penal Code
relating to causing disunity or hatred on
grounds of religion and public fear or
distress; and the Sedition Act – to silence
critical voices both on- and offline. In March,
police questioned the director, producer and
four others involved in making a film about a
woman exploring the concept of the afterlife
that was criticized by government officials
and religious groups. The film was banned in
September, and police investigations into the
filmmakers were ongoing at year's end.1

249

On 16 October, Kean Wong, editor of the
book Rebirth: Reformasi, Resistance, and
Hope in New Malaysia which was banned in
2020, was arrested for sedition. He was
released after two days but investigations
were continuing.2
The Printing Presses and Publications Act
was increasingly used to restrict the right to
freedom of expression of LGBTI people. In
February, the Home Ministry banned three
books for “immoral” content and promoting
“LGBTI lifestyle”. In May, the ministry seized
and subsequently banned LGBTI-themed
products of a globally known watch company,
introducing new penalties of up to three
years’ imprisonment for selling or wearing
them.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Authorities continued to use the Peaceful
Assembly Act (PAA), the Penal Code and the
Minor Offences Act to restrict the right to
peaceful protest.
In March, police questioned under the PAA
and Minor Offences Act seven organizers of
and participants in the Women’s March
Malaysia that took place to mark International
Women’s Day.
In May, police questioned the organizers of
two separate Labour Day rallies, also under
the PAA.
In July, police arrested eight members of
the widely persecuted Ahmadi religious
minority for joining a gathering in support of
LGBTI rights. All were released after one day
but remained under investigation.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
There were ongoing allegations of human
rights violations in immigration detention
centres where refugees and migrants were
indefinitely detained. In February, human
rights groups called for investigations into
conditions after the government revealed that
150 foreigners, including seven children and
25 women, had died in the centres in 2022.
In December, authorities disclosed that
12,400 people, including 1,400 children,
were being held in immigration detention
centres. An announcement in August that 80

250

children and their parents or guardians would
be transferred to temporary facilities “more
conducive to their care” was criticized by
human rights groups because it amounted to
continued indefinite detention.
In January, the authorities forcibly deported
114 adults and children to Myanmar where
they were at risk of serious human rights
violations. All had been subject to a legal
challenge by Amnesty International Malaysia
and Asylum Access Malaysia to prevent
deportations to Myanmar.3
In April, the government announced that it
was investigating the arrival of hundreds of
migrant workers who, despite paying
exorbitant fees to intermediaries, did not have
jobs and were therefore vulnerable to forced
labour. In December, police detained over
1,000 people in raids targeting
undocumented migrants in the capital, Kuala
Lumpur; 171 migrant workers were detained
when attempting to lodge a complaint with
police in Johor against the failure of their
agents to provide promised jobs.
In a suspected case of enforced
disappearance, Myanmar refugee and activist
Thuzar Maung, her husband Saw Than Tin
Win and three children were abducted by
unknown people from their home in Selangor
state. A police investigation was opened, but
they remained missing.4

DEATH PENALTY
The Abolition of Mandatory Death Penalty Act
2023, which came into force in July, fully
abolished the death penalty for seven
offences and introduced sentencing
discretion for all offences to which the
mandatory death penalty was applicable.
Terms of imprisonment of 30 to 40 years and
whipping, which violates the prohibition of
torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, were
introduced as alternative sentences to the
discretionary death penalty and to replace life
imprisonment.5
The Revision of Sentence of Death and
Imprisonment for Natural Life (Temporary
Jurisdiction of The Federal Court) Act entered
into force on 12 September, providing the

The State of the World’s Human Rights

possibility for all individuals sentenced to
death or imprisonment for their natural life
and who had their sentences upheld by the
Federal Court to apply to have their
sentences reviewed. A total of 1,020 people
were eligible to apply under the Act.6
The moratorium on executions, established
in 2018, remained in place, but the courts
continued to impose death sentences for
offences where it was an applicable
punishment.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
At least 13 people, including three foreigners,
died in police custody.
The Independent Police Conduct
Commission Act, establishing a body to
investigate police misconduct and provide
oversight, came into force on 18 October
despite criticism over the commission’s lack
of independence as well as investigative and
enforcement powers.7

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Palm oil plantations, logging and the
construction of dams continued to threaten
the lands and livelihoods of Indigenous
Peoples. In April, seven members of the
Temoq Indigenous People brought a legal
challenge against the government for its
approval of the environmental impact
assessment report of a proposed palm oil
project in Rompin district, Pahang state. The
challenge claimed the government had failed
to take account of how the project breaches
their rights to a clean, safe and sustainable
environment.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In February, the government announced it
would need two to three years to develop the
national climate change bill that was
expected to legislate for climate change
mitigation actions, despite promising to
finalize it by the end of 2022.
1. “Malaysia: End escalating harassment of Mentega Terbang
Filmmakers”, 22 March
2. “Malaysia: Update to the detention of Kean Wong, editor of Rebirth:
Reformasi, Resistance, and Hope in New Malaysia”, 17 October

The State of the World’s Human Rights

3. “Malaysia: Amnesty International Malaysia condemns deportation of
more Myanmar nationals, including children”, 23 February
4. “Malaysia: Myanmar refugee activist and family still missing a
month after suspected enforced disappearance”, 4 August
5. “Malaysia: World Day against the Death Penalty: Call for full abolition
renewed three months after repeal of mandatory death penalty
enforced”, 10 October
6. “Malaysia: Resentencing process must be a fair and meaningful
opportunity for commutation of death sentences”, 19 June
7. Malaysia: Strides and Setbacks - Amnesty International: Submission
to the 45th Session of the UPR Working Group, January - February
2024, 12 July

MALDIVES
Republic of Maldives
Authorities further restricted press freedom,
including through penalizing and arresting
journalists reporting on protests. The police
routinely used unlawful force to suppress
protests, and human rights defenders faced
reprisals. Gender inequality was particularly
evident in political representation. The
Maldivian government announced plans to
reinstate the use of the death penalty.

BACKGROUND
Mohamed Muizzu of Progressive Alliance – a
coalition between the Progressive Party of
Maldives and the People’s National Congress
– defeated Ibrahim Solih of the Maldivian
Democratic Party in the presidential elections
on 30 September. In August, the Supreme
Court upheld the Elections Commission of
Maldives’ disqualification of former president
Abdulla Yameen of the Progressive Party of
Maldives from standing in the election
following his conviction in 2022 for
corruption.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
Police routinely used unlawful force to disrupt
peaceful protests and arbitrarily arrested
protesters. In January, nine people were
wrongfully arrested during peaceful protests.
In June, police used pepper spray at an
opposition protest leading to several injuries.
Protests were organized against India’s
influence in the Maldives (“India Out”

251

protests), calling for the removal of Indian
military personnel stationed in the country.
Protests were also organized to call for the
release of former president and current
opposition leader Abdulla Yameen, who was
serving an 11-year jail term after his
conviction in 2022. In March, 12 protesters
were arrested, including Adam Asif, a
member of Abdulla Yameen’s legal team.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
JOURNALISTS
At least four journalists were arrested by the
police while reporting on protests throughout
the year. On 19 January, Mohamed Samah
was placed under house arrest for a month
after covering a protest. On 16 March,
Hussain Juman was detained after reporting
on a Progressive Party rally and released
without charge the next day. On 7 February,
police used pepper spray on two journalists
and pushed one to the ground with their
shields, causing him to lose consciousness.
The new Evidence Act took effect in
January, allowing judges to compel journalists
to reveal their sources or be subject to fines
or jail if they refuse. Journalists increasingly
faced harassment and threats, including
death threats, from the state and other actors
over articles they published related to
corruption and religion. Authorities failed to
investigate and ensure accountability. On 22
November, the criminal court dropped
charges against the accused in the murder of
blogger Yameen Rasheed in 2017.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
In March, the Civil Court of Maldives upheld
the Ministry of Youth, Sports and Community
Empowerment’s 2019 decision to de-register
the Maldivian Democracy Network, which
had been unable to function since it was shut
down in 2019.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Women’s rights activists raised concerns
about the continued lack of political
representation. During the presidential
election in September, all eight candidates
were men. Women continued to be

252

significantly under-represented in political
life, comprising just 4.6% of members of
parliament.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In October, the UN Human Rights Council
raised concerns that the police had failed to
investigate targeted harassment, threats and
intimidation against individuals affiliated with
the women’s human rights organization
Uthema, related to their 2021 report to the
UN CEDAW Committee.
The case of Ahmed Rilwan, an investigative
journalist and human rights defender who
disappeared in April 2014, remained
unresolved after a court on 22 November
dropped charges against a man accused of
murdering him.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Maldives remained one of the countries most
vulnerable to climate change. Rising sea
levels had already caused severe erosion of
inhabited islands and depleted freshwater
resources.
At COP28 in November, states reached an
agreement on the operationalization of a new
loss and damage fund to support
communities most severely affected by the
climate crisis. The Maldives called upon
higher-income countries to contribute to this
vital fund.
Recent Maldivian administrations have
failed to comply with environmental laws and
regulations and neglected the concerns of
local communities around mitigating the
detrimental impacts of development projects,
such as no compensation for loss of housing.
Environmental groups warned of risks from
climate change to reef ecosystems, seagrass
meadows, mangroves, wetlands and island
shelterbelts, which are the basis of many
livelihoods, including tourism and fishing.

MALI
Republic of Mali

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly were repressed.
Journalists and a human rights defender
were forcibly disappeared and government
critics arbitrarily detained. Government
forces, foreign military personnel and armed
groups committed grave violations and
abuses, including extrajudicial executions
and unlawful killings. The UN recorded
hundreds of cases of sexual violence
against women and girls. Cases linked to
violence and discrimination based on work
and descent resulted in convictions.

respectively. In 2021, Cheick Koné was
removed as senior advocate-general at the
supreme court after he criticized judicial
investigations, including in the case of former
prime minister Soumeylou Boubѐye Maïga
who died in pretrial detention in 2022.

BACKGROUND

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS

Armed conflict between the army and armed
groups continued. The Group for the Support
of Islam and Muslims (GSIM) and the Islamic
State in the Sahel (ISS) fought for control of
the Gao region.
A new constitution was adopted after it was
voted for via a referendum.
In June, the UN Security Council approved
the termination as of 31 December of the UN
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. In the context of the gradual
departure of UN troops, and the breakdown
of the 2015 peace and reconciliation
agreement, fighting erupted in August
between government forces and the Strategic
Permanent Framework for Peace, Security
and Development (CSP-PSD), a coalition of
armed groups. In November, government
forces regained the town of Kidal from the
CSP-PSD.

In March, journalist Mohamed Youssouf
Bathily, also known as Ras Bath, was
arrested and charged with making
unfounded claims and discrediting the state
after he declared on the radio that
Soumeylou Boubѐye Maïga was
“assassinated” (see above, Freedom of
expression). In July, he was acquitted on the
first charge but remained in detention.
During the same month, Rokiatou Doumbia,
also known as Rose Vie Chère, was arrested
for criticizing on TikTok the government’s
economic performance and security policies.
She was charged with “inciting revolt” and
“disturbing public order”, given a one-year
prison term and ordered to pay XOF 1 million
(about USD 1,636) in August.
In September, Adama Ben Diarra, also
known as Ben le Cerveau, a National
Transitional Council (CNT) member, was
arrested when he said via radio that the
government should organize presidential
elections for February 2024 in accordance
with its agenda. He was given a two-year
sentence (one year suspended) for
“discrediting the state” and removed from
the CNT.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In January, Aminata Dicko, a human rights
defender, was forced into exile in the cities of
Geneva and Paris after denouncing abuses
by the armed forces in a briefing to the UN
Security Council, following which the
gendarmerie summoned her for questioning
in connection with allegations of high treason
and defamation.
Cheick Mohamed Cherif Koné and Dramane
Diarra, magistrates and members of the 20
February Appeal, a pro-democracy
association, were disbarred from the
magistrate’s roll in August and September,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
In August, in Bandiagara district, Mopti
region, security forces killed one person and
injured seven others when they fired at
people protesting against killings by armed
groups.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
On 26 January, Sory Koné, the programme
director of Radio DANAYA in Souba, Ségou
region, was abducted from his home by
unidentified people, suspected to be
members of the security forces. His
whereabouts and fate remained unknown.

253

Journalists Aliou Touré and Idriss Martinez
Konipo were held, presumably by security
force members, in unknown locations for five
and three days, respectively, during April.
The fate and whereabouts of human rights
defender Hammadoun Dicko, abducted in
December in the capital, Bamako by
unidentified individuals, remained unknown.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
ARMED GROUPS
On 22 April, the GSIM attacked army bases
in Sévaré, Mopti region, next to the airport
and a UN camp. The government said 10
civilians were killed and 61 others wounded.
Twenty houses and shelters hosting internally
displaced people were destroyed during the
attack.
Between 27 and 28 June, ISS fighters
attacked Gaina and Boyna villages in the Gao
region, killing 17 villagers. After the attack,
they stole livestock and abducted at least four
villagers from Boyna.
In July, armed assailants attacked Djankoin
village, in the Ségou region, killing at least 10
civilians, according to local and media
sources.
During August, according to the media,
GSIM fighters carried out attacks in
Bandiagara region, killing 15 civilians in
Bodio and 22 others in Yarou.
From August onwards, the GSIM restricted
access to the city of Timbuktu, after the army
reoccupied Goundam and Ber military camps
in the Timbuktu area, following the
withdrawal from the area of UN troops.
According to OCHA, at least 33,100 people
from Timbuktu had moved to neighbouring
countries since the siege began.
On 7 September, armed combatants
attacked a civilian passenger boat leaving
Gao for Mopti, near Zarhoy village, killing at
least 49 civilians and 15 soldiers.1
GOVERNMENT FORCES AND ALLIES
In May, OHCHR, the UN human rights office,
published its findings on a military operation
in Moura during March 2022, concluding
that some 500 people had been summarily
executed and at least 58 women raped by

254

Malian soldiers and foreign military personnel
in a five-day operation. No one was held
accountable for the killings. Armed forces
and allied foreign military personnel deployed
in Mali continued to carry out international
humanitarian law violations.
On 6 March, according to Human Rights
Watch, soldiers and foreign military personnel
rounded up 200 men in Sossobé, Mopti
region, and took them to the mosque during
a joint patrol. According to witnesses, the
bodies of five of them were later found on the
outskirts of Sossobé, while the fate and
whereabouts of 21 others who were
blindfolded, handcuffed and taken away in
helicopters remained unknown. The rest
were released.
In another joint military operation later in
March, also involving Dozo hunters, 26
people, including a six-year-old boy, were
killed in Ouenkoro, according to media
reports. Soldiers collected smartphones from
people in the local market to prevent them
from communicating evidence of violations.
According to witnesses, on 9 May, foreign
military personnel attacked a temporary
herders’ camp in Gogoro in Douentza region,
killing 11 civilians. The whereabouts and fate
of four people, including a 10-year-old boy,
whom they abducted, remained unknown.
During an army offensive on 5 October,
soldiers accompanied by foreign military
personnel, extrajudicially executed 17
villagers in Ersane in Bourem district, Gao
region. Media and local sources said all of
them were beheaded, and 15 of the bodies
were left booby-trapped.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
In April, the UN said it had recorded 470
incidents of sexual violence carried out by
armed groups and government and allied
forces, between January and March, 51 of
which were conflict related. All the victims
were women and 11 were girls as young as
12.

DISCRIMINATION
Violence and discrimination against people
based on work and descent remained

The State of the World’s Human Rights

prevalent. In May, UN experts called on the
Malian authorities to criminalize slavery,
noting that descent-based slavery remained
widespread. Between February and March,
the Assizes Court in Kayes convicted 56
people in connection with attacks, including
the killings of victims of work and descentbased discrimination which took place in the
towns of Diandioumé in 2020, and Bafoulabé
in 2021.
1. “Mali: Amnesty International condemns attack on Timbuktu boat,
calls for protection of civilians”, 8 September (French only)

MALTA
Republic of Malta
Parliament decriminalized abortion in
limited cases where the life of the pregnant
person was in grave danger. Concerns
persisted about failures to assist refugees
and migrants at sea. The European Court of
Human Rights found that the migration
detention system was hindering human
rights protection. Proposed reforms to
strengthen freedom of expression were
inadequate. The proposed TransGas
pipeline was contrary to EU targets to
refrain from investing in new fossil fuel
projects.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In June, parliament amended the criminal
code making it lawful for a doctor to
terminate a pregnancy if the pregnant
person’s life was at immediate risk and before
“fetal viability”. Doctors were allowed to refer
pregnant people whose health was in grave
jeopardy to a medical panel to be granted
access to an abortion. Cases of grave risk to
health that were “not life-threatening” were
excluded from the amendment, and abortion
remained illegal in all other circumstances.1

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS

delaying of, assistance to, people in peril at
sea in its search and rescue region, were
compounded by a lack of transparency about
rescue operations and the response to calls
for rescue.
In May, the Tareq Ben Zeyad armed group
affiliated with the Libyan Arab Armed Forces
intercepted and brought back to Libya a boat
carrying about 500 people. The Armed
Forces of Malta (AFM) denied involvement in
this forced transfer. Rescue NGOs had
alerted Malta to the boat’s position in the
Maltese search and rescue region. The AFM
stated that no boat had been found at the
reported position and they had not
coordinated a rescue. UN agencies in Libya
reported the arrival of a boat carrying about
500 people two days later in Benghazi.
In July, at a constitutional court hearing of a
case brought by 32 asylum seekers for
breach of their rights, the prime minister
claimed their detention aboard ferries had
been related to managing the Covid-19
pandemic. Between late April and early June
2020, Malta arbitrarily detained more than
425 people rescued at sea in substandard
conditions aboard ferries positioned outside
territorial waters. The case was ongoing at
year’s end.
In October, in A.D. v Malta, the European
Court of Human Rights ordered Malta to pay
EUR 25,000 to an Ivorian asylum seeker
who, aged 17, had been arbitrarily detained
in inhuman and degrading conditions and
without access to effective remedies. The
court noted that Malta’s migration detention
system was hindering human rights
protection in these areas and that measures
at a national level were required in execution
of the judgment.
In November, three asylum seekers known
as the El Hiblu 3, who had opposed attempts
to unlawfully return them to Libya in 2019
when two of them were still children, were
indicted on charges including acts of
terrorism. The three men faced life
imprisonment.2

Approximately 380 people disembarked in
Malta after being rescued at sea. Continuing
concerns over Malta’s failure to give, or

The State of the World’s Human Rights

255

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
The trial of a businessman accused of
commissioning the 2017 killing of journalist
Daphne Caruana Galizia had yet to start. In
September, the Council of Europe
Commissioner for Human Rights
(commissioner) expressed concern at the
delay in ensuring that all those responsible
for the killing were brought to justice.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In September, the commissioner noted that
legislative proposals to strengthen freedom of
expression were inadequate and that civil
society and the media community had not
been consulted on the amendments.
Furthermore, concerns remained about
journalists' access to information.
In July, a report by the European
Commission criticized the review of the
Freedom of Information Act and the
obstacles faced by the media and citizens
when requesting access to information held
by public authorities.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Malta was vulnerable to the impacts of global
heating, including on agricultural productivity,
health and availability of water. With 92% of
its energy derived from fossil fuels, a report in
June by NGO Friends of the Earth claimed
that the government’s proposed Melita
TransGas pipeline connecting Malta and Italy
would lock Malta into a future of fossil fuel
use that was contrary to EU targets to refrain
from investing in new fossil fuel projects. In
2021, Malta had negotiated with the
European Commission a target of reducing
carbon emissions by 19% by 2030 compared
with 2005 levels. This was less than the 36%
reduction proposed by the commission.
1. “Malta: Lives put at risk as parliament waters down bill seeking to
partially decriminalize abortion”, 28 June
2. Malta: Human Rights Violations Against Refugees and Migrants,
Impunity and Abortion Ban Continue, 1 August

256

MAURITANIA
Islamic Republic of Mauritania
At least one person died in police custody
following acts of torture. An activist was the
victim of an enforced disappearance by
Mauritanian police in collaboration with
their Senegalese counterparts. The rights to
freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly were violated by repressive
measures including internet disruption and
excessive use of force. Descent-based
slavery persisted in the country. UN experts
reported a general culture of impunity
around gender-based violence.

BACKGROUND
In May, the ruling party was declared winner
of the legislative, regional and local elections,
one year after Mohamed Ould Ghazouani had
won the presidential election. Some
opposition parties contested the results
based on fraud allegations. In December,
former president Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz
was sentenced to five years’ imprisonment for
corruption.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
On 9 February, human rights defender Souvi
Ould Jibril Ould Cheine was summoned to
the Dar Naim 2 police station over an unpaid
debt and taken into custody. He was later
transferred to Sheikh Zayed Hospital and
pronounced dead. Souvi’s death was initially
attributed to a heart attack but, following
protests, a Ministry of Health autopsy
determined the cause as traumatic
asphyxiation due to strangulation. The Public
Prosecutor ordered the arrest of the
commissioner and all police officers present
during Souvi’s arrest and interrogation.
In June, at a press conference, lawyers
representing the family of Oumar Diop, who
died after police detention, alleged that he
had been tortured. Police claimed Oumar
was arrested after a fight, questioned at
Sebkha police station, and later transferred to
hospital due to breathing issues, where he

The State of the World’s Human Rights

died shortly after arrival. The autopsy report
attributed his death to cardiac arrest caused
by excessive cocaine and alcohol
consumption. The family lawyers called for a
thorough investigation.

investigation of all disappearances in this
period and the prosecution of those
responsible, including military and civilian
leaders.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

On 27 September, the Initiative for the
Resurgence of the Abolitionist Movement
(IRA) staged a peaceful sit-in at the Ministry
of Justice to protest the arrest of Youba Siby.
Security forces violently dispersed the
protesters despite having been notified of the
planned action. The IRA reported over 10
injured, with victims taken to various
hospitals.

In June, mobile internet access was shut
down by authorities for several days after
nationwide protests over the death of Oumar
Diop in police custody. Access was also
blocked multiple times during high school
exams. According to the government, this
was to prevent cheating.
On 28 July, a 19-year-old high school
student was detained at the women’s prison
in the capital, Nouakchott for “insulting and
backbiting the prophet” in her baccalaureate
exam comments. The student’s copy was
shared on social media by an exam official,
who deemed the remarks blasphemous.
Blasphemy against the prophet remained
punishable by death as per the law.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
On 14 September, activist Youba Siby, also
known as Youba El Ghaouth, was arrested by
the Criminal Investigation Division in Senegal.
He was subjected to enforced disappearance
for 20 days, with the Senegalese and
Mauritanian authorities providing no
information as to his fate or whereabouts.1 On
6 October, Mauritania’s National Human
Rights Commission reported that Youba Siby
was being held in Nouakchott Civil Prison
without legal representation or contact with
his family. He received a two-year sentence
for “inciting hatred” and “undermining army
morale” via social media.
In October 2023, the UN Committee on
Enforced Disappearances found that
proposals to establish a truth and
reconciliation process in relation to
Mauritania’s “Passif
Humanitaire" (“humanitarian liability”) period
of mass human rights violations, between
1989 and 1992, which involved
disappearances, detentions, executions and
expulsions, had not been considered in
depth. The committee called for the

The State of the World’s Human Rights

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY

DISCRIMINATION
SLAVERY
In the July report on Mauritania, the UN
Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of
slavery noted the persistence of both
descent-based and modern forms of slavery
in certain parts of the country. The report
highlighted the social, economic and political
exclusion experienced by currently and
formerly enslaved individuals and their
descendants. While efforts to raise awareness
of anti-slavery laws were recognized, the
Special Rapporteur stressed the importance
of ensuring victims were informed of their
rights and the process for seeking redress.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
In its October statement following a visit to
the country, the UN Working Group on
discrimination against women and girls
commended the country’s efforts in
enhancing its institutional, political and legal
framework for gender equality. However, it
emphasized the need to address lack of
access to justice and the culture of impunity
surrounding gender-based violence. It called
for an end to harmful practices such as
female genital mutilation and child marriage,
which often led to the sacrificing of education
and health, and the risk of death during
childbirth.

257

1. “Mauritania: Amnesty International condemns the enforced
disappearance Youba Siby and subsequent violations of his rights”,
16 October

MEXICO
United Mexican States
The authorities continued to criminalize the
rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and
expression. Land, territory and
environmental defenders were criminalized
for protesting and there were frequent
killings of journalists and defenders.
The government's failure to protect refugees
and migrants continued, nevertheless, the
Supreme Court ruled that the maximum
stay in an immigration detention centre was
36 hours. Access to abortion eased, with a
ruling that the criminalization of abortion
was unconstitutional. The number of
femicides remained very high and cases
were not properly investigated. More than
114,000 people had been registered as
missing and disappeared since 1962.
Relatives searching for disappeared people
continued to face serious risks, such as
enforced disappearance, murder, repression
and threats. The Inter-American Court of
Human Rights ruled that Mexico must
eliminate the concept of arraigo detention
(precautionary detention without charge)
and modify the pretrial detention system.
The independence of the judiciary remained
under threat, including through the arbitrary
detention of judges. The construction of the
“Mayan Train” continued despite
environmental concerns. The government’s
failure to phase out fossil fuels persisted,
and work began at the “Dos Bocas” refinery.
Many states had yet to change their civil
codes regarding same-sex marriage, despite
its authorization throughout Mexico in
2015.

BACKGROUND
Murders and enforced disappearances
increased in the 16 years that the military
were involved in public security operations.

258

The National Human Rights Commission
(CNDH) determined that members of the
military and National Guard (the federal law
enforcement institution) had committed
serious human rights violations in 28 cases,
including multiple crimes under international
law, such as torture, extrajudicial executions
and enforced disappearances.
In April, the Supreme Court invalidated the
transfer of the National Guard to the Ministry
of Defence (SEDENA), on the grounds that
the constitution expressly stated that the
National Guard was a civil entity and its
actions had to be determined by the
Secretariat of Public Security and Citizen
Protection. In October, the Executive branch
insisted that the National Guard had
performed well and proposed to send another
request to Congress to enable the National
Guard to become part of the SEDENA,
denying allegations of human rights violations
from victims, civil society organizations and
human rights activists.
Lack of transparency, accountability and
access to information from SEDENA
continued. In October, the Commission for
Access to Truth, Historical Clarification and
the Promotion of Justice for serious human
rights violations between 1965 and 1990
published a report denouncing SEDENA’s
obstruction of access to historical
documentation relating to human rights
violations committed during the political
repression of 1965 to 1990.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
The authorities continued to criminalize and
use excessive force against people exercising
their right to protest, and used the judicial
system disproportionately to criminalize land,
territory and environmental defenders.1 In
San Cristóbal de las Casas, Chiapas state,
members of the Colonia Maya
neighbourhood’s board of directors were
accused of abduction for their protest against
the construction of residential housing in an
environmentally protected area. In March
and July, Miguel López Vega and Alejandro
Torres Chocolatl, Nahua communicators and
defenders in Zacatepec, Puebla state, were

The State of the World’s Human Rights

finally freed of charges of “obstruction of
public works” for their protest against the
construction of a drain that would pollute the
Metlapanapa River. In May, César Hernández
Feliciano and José Luis Gutiérrez Hernández,
Tseltal defenders in Chilón, Chiapas state,
were found guilty of the crime of “riot” for
opposing the construction of a National
Guard barracks in their territory. In March,
Juan Diego Valencia Chan, Arturo Albornoz
May and Jesús Ariel Uc Ortega, Mayan
defenders in Sitilpech, Yucatán state, were
accused of “attacks on roadways” for
opposing the activities of a large pig farm in
their territory because of the pollution, water
contamination and health problems it was
causing.
In September, authorities of the city of León,
Guanajuato state, acknowledged excessive
use of force against women who had been
protesting against gender violence in 2020
and apologized to the victims.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Military forces continued to use unnecessary
and excessive force and carry out
extrajudicial executions. Impunity persisted
for these crimes and human rights violations.
On 26 February, Mexican soldiers allegedly
killed five young men travelling in a pick-up
truck in the city of Nuevo Laredo, Tamaulipas
state. On 18 May, a surveillance camera
showed members of the military forces
allegedly killing five men in the same city.
After the dissemination of the video, CNDH
opened an investigation into the case, finding
serious human rights violations and
recommended that the army collaborate with
the prosecutor’s investigations and support
the victims’ families financially and
psychologically.
In October, a criminal court in the city of
Monterrey, Nuevo León state, established the
criminal responsibility of members of the
army for the extrajudicial execution in 2010
of Jorge Antonio Mercado Alonso and Javier
Francisco Arredondo Verdugo, students at
the Monterrey Institute of Technology and
Higher Education.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

The presence of military forces deployed in
public spaces increased. In January, 6,060
members of the National Guard were
temporarily deployed in the Mexico City
subway system alleging security concerns.
Local NGOs reported that the measure was
inadequate because the main problem was
the lack of maintenance of the subway, and
the presence of the military did not increase
security in the transport system.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Journalists and human rights defenders
continued to be at significant risk. At least
five journalists were killed in possible
connection to their work, according to the
organization Article 19. A report published in
2023 by the NGO Global Witness stated that
31 land defenders and environmental
activists were killed in 2022. During the year,
at least 13 human rights defenders were
murdered, according to OHCHR. The
Protection Mechanism for Human Rights
Defenders and Journalists counted at least
188 cases of kidnappings, threats and
physical aggressions against human rights
defenders and journalists in 2023.
In April and May, new cases of the use of
Pegasus spyware emerged against two
members of the NGO Miguel Agustín Pro
Juárez Human Rights Centre (Centro Prodh),
and Alejandro Encinas, then undersecretary
for human rights. The surveillance could be
linked to their work on grave human rights
violations, such as the Ayotzinapa case (see
below, Enforced disappearances).

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The number of migrants, asylum seekers and
refugees arriving in Mexico with the aim of
reaching the USA or Canada increased. The
Mexican Refugee Agency announced that
141,053 people had sought asylum in
Mexico in 2023, most of them from Haiti,
Honduras, Cuba, Guatemala and El Salvador.
The authorities continued to fail to protect
the rights to life and security of migrants,
asylum seekers and refugees. On 28 March,
at least 40 migrants died and another 29
were hospitalized in the city of Ciudad

259

Juárez, Chihuahua state, due to a fire in a
migration detention centre. Migrants were
allegedly left locked up after the fire had
started.2
In March, the Supreme Court issued a
landmark ruling declaring that the maximum
stay in an immigration detention centre was
36 hours, after which migrants and asylum
seekers must be released. The court also
stated that migrants and refugees must have
a proper legal defence to protect their rights.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
The government agreed to keep public
memorials commemorating women’s rights
campaigners. In June, authorities placed
metal fences around the Roundabout of
Women who Fight in Mexico City to remove
the memorial, but after pressure from civil
society organizations and activists, Martí
Batres Guadarrama, Mexico City’s head of
government, agreed to keep the memorial.
Access to abortion improved in Mexico. In
September, the Supreme Court declared the
criminalization of abortion unconstitutional in
the Federal Criminal Code in a case brought
by feminist organizations. The decision
meant that the authorities were obliged to
guarantee access to abortion to women and
people with gestational capacity. Likewise,
the Supreme Court stated that the
suspension of medical personnel and
midwives for performing or assisting with
abortion was also unconstitutional, since it
had a discriminatory effect.
Cases of sexual violence and femicide
remained high, and due diligence to
investigate these crimes properly was lacking.
Approximately nine women were murdered
per day on average in 2023, according to the
Executive Secretariat of the National Public
Security System. In Ciudad Juárez,
Chihuahua state, where the documentation of
femicide started 30 years ago, there had still
been no justice for many victims. Local
organizations, victims’ families and Amnesty
International publicly honoured the memory
of the women who had been killed.
In January, a Prosecutor’s Office
Specializing in Feminicides was created in

260

San Luis Potosí state at the insistence of
families that femicides be investigated
properly. In February, the Attorney General’s
Office of the State of Mexico recognized
inadequacies in the investigations into the
femicides of Nadia Muciño Márquez, Daniela
Sánchez Curiel, Diana Velázquez Florencio
and Julia Sosa Conde, and offered a public
apology.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
The number of missing and disappeared
people remained high. In 2023, the National
Search Commission (CNB) registered at least
12,031 new cases of missing and
disappeared people, of whom 8,426 were
men, 3,596 were women, and nine were
unidentified. According to official figures, a
total of 114,004 people were registered as
missing and disappeared between 1962 and
the end of 2023.
Relatives searching for disappeared people
faced serious risks, including enforced
disappearance, killing, repression and
threats. In May, Teresa Magueyal, who had
been searching for her son since 2020, was
murdered in Celaya, Guanajuato state. In
October, Griselda Armas, who had been
searching for her son since September 2022,
was killed in Tacámbaro, Michoacán state,
along with her husband. In August, families
searching for disappeared people demanded
access to the Institute of Forensic Sciences
and Social Reintegration Centre, but reported
that staff of the Attorney General’s Office of
Queretaro attacked them and threatened
them not to report the incident.
In July, the Interdisciplinary Group of
Independent Experts (GIEI) published its
sixth and final report relating to the case of
43 students from Ayotzinapa, Guerrero state,
who were forcibly disappeared in 2014. The
experts emphasized the participation of
Mexican military forces in the enforced
disappearances and the lack of access to
information held by public institutions. The
GIEI subsequently announced its departure
from the country due to lack of cooperation
from the Mexican authorities. The president
reacted by expressing his support for the

The State of the World’s Human Rights

army, criticizing civil society organizations
representing the victims, and announcing an
ongoing criminal investigation against Omar
Gómez Trejo, former head of the Special
Investigation and Litigation Unit for
Ayotzinapa, who resigned in 2022 after
denouncing undue interference by the
Attorney General’s Office in the investigation
of the case.3
In August, the head of the CNB, Karla
Quintana, resigned after the president
announced the creation of a new census on
disappearances, arguing that CNB figures
were unreliable and too high. Civil society
organizations and activists feared that the
Executive branch might try to lower the
official numbers of disappeared people to
hide the failure of federal public security
policies. In October, Teresa Guadalupe Reyes
Sahagún was appointed as the new head of
the CNB; civil society organizations
expressed concern around the lack of
consultation, participation, transparency and
scrutiny in the recruitment process, as well
as her lack of experience. In December, the
Executive presented the results of the new
census on disappearances, decreasing the
official number of disappeared and missing
people between 1962 and August 2023. It
also revealed that they did not have enough
information to search for 79,955 of those
people.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
The Inter-American Court of Human Rights
condemned Mexico in two judgments
regarding arbitrary detention. The first case
involved the arbitrary detention in 2006 of
three men, two of them Indigenous, including
Jorge Marcial Tzompaxtle Tecpile. The men
were detained by police and confined for
more than three months in arraigo detention
(precautionary detention without charge)
without access to a judge, and then put in
pretrial detention for a further two years.4 The
second case concerned Daniel García
Rodríguez and Reyes Alpízar Ortiz, who were
held in pretrial detention for more than 17
years for their alleged participation in a

The State of the World’s Human Rights

homicide, subjected to torture and other illtreatment, and held in arraigo detention.
In both cases, the court ordered Mexico to
reform its legal framework, eliminating arraigo
detention and modifying the pretrial detention
system. The court stated that mandatory
pretrial detention was contrary to the
American Convention on Human Rights.
In September, the UN Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention urged the Mexican
authorities to remove mandatory pretrial
detention and arraigo detention provisions
from the constitution. The working group also
expressed concern over the militarization of
public security, the excessive use of force
during arrests, and the deprivation of liberty
under an overly punitive drug policy since
2006.
The president continued to make public
accusations against the Supreme Court and
the judiciary when their decisions went
against the plans of the Executive branch. In
June, Judge Angélica Sánchez, based in
Veracruz state, was accused of “crimes
against public faith and influence peddling”,
after her decision to release a man accused
of homicide due to lack of evidence. She was
detained in the capital, Mexico City by
members of the police and National Guard
assigned to the National Commission against
Kidnappings (CONASE), in coordination with
the Attorney General’s Office of Veracruz. The
Federal Public Defender’s Office described
her detention as an attack on judicial
independence. Serious irregularities were
raised, including arbitrary detention and the
lack of authority of the National Guard and
CONASE to detain her. In July, she was
released from prison and held under house
arrest.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
The construction of the “Mayan Train” (a
1,525km intercity railway across the Yucatán
Peninsula) continued in 2023, threatening
the environment in southern Mexico, as well
as the right to a clean, healthy and
sustainable environment. Activists and civil
society organizations denounced the
government’s failure to enforce the federal

261

environmental law while building the railway
and stated that the project would have an
adverse effect on the ecosystem, particularly
the underwater system in the south-east of
the country. The federal environmental law
states the authorities’ obligations to protect
the environment and carry out environmental
impact assessments of public works. The
Secretariat of the Commission for
Environmental Cooperation of the MexicoUnited States-Canada Treaty recommended
that the Mexican authorities produce a report
on the risks and impacts related to
the project.
The government continued promoting the
production and use of fossil fuels. Authorities
inaugurated the “Dos Bocas” refinery in the
Tabasco state in 2022 and operations began
in 2023.
Eighty-four people from the El Bosque
community in Tabasco state were evacuated
on 1 November due to sea level rises
attributed to the climate crisis. They
demanded relocation and that their basic
needs be met, including housing, schooling
and public services. The government had
promised to relocate them, but nothing had
materialized by the end of the year.5

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Same-sex marriage had been authorized in
all 32 states since 2015, but some states had
not yet modified their civil codes. In June, the
local congress of Nuevo León state amended
the civil code to establish that two people
aged over 18 years could get married
regardless of their sex. Other states that had
not yet modified their codes to recognize
same-sex marriage included Aguascalientes,
Chiapas and Chihuahua.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In May, the authorities amended various
articles in the General Law on Health to state
that the Mexican Institution of Public Health
would provide access without fees to health
services, medicines and other supplies to
people not affiliated to a public health
institution. Non-affiliated people are those
without a formal job in which public

262

healthcare is paid by the employer, those
without a family member in formal
employment, or those who were not students.
Although the amendments aimed to
guarantee the right to health, particularly to
individuals in more vulnerable situations,
activists and organizations claimed that the
Mexican Institution of Public Health did not
have sufficient economic resources to fulfil
the guarantee.
1. “Mexico: Land and freedom? Criminalizing defenders of land, territory
and environment”, 13 September
2. “Mexico: 39 people die in migrant detention centre fire”, 30 March
3. “Mexico: Authorities’ actions impede access to truth and justice for
Ayotzinapa”, 2 October
4. “Mexico must comply with the judgment of the CoIDH regarding
arraigo and pretrial detention”, 30 January (Spanish only)
5. “Mexico: Climate displaced community needs urgent relocation”, 8
November

MOLDOVA
Republic of Moldova
The rights to freedom of association and
expression were violated. Torture and other
ill-treatment remained unaddressed, and
impunity prevailed for past violations. The
right to privacy was compromised by a new
law on the security service and its activities.
Discrimination against LGBTI people
remained commonplace. Authorities
introduced a new immigration regime under
which refugees risked losing access to
critical goods and services. Moldova
adopted a climate change adaptation
programme. In the breakaway Transdniestria
region, the killing of an opposition leader
remained unsolved.

BACKGROUND
The economic downturn underpinned by
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine continued,
further affecting living standards in one of the
poorest countries in Europe and fuelling
opposition-led anti-government protests.
Tensions with Russia escalated and 45
Russian diplomats and other staff were

The State of the World’s Human Rights

expelled over accusations of espionage. A
growing number of Russian nationals were
refused entry to Moldova if the border police
concluded that they had failed to provide
well-founded reasons for visiting the country;
in some weeks there were dozens of such
cases. Some people travelling by air were
stranded for hours and even days at the
airport as a result.

address these long-standing issues were
made public.
No further progress was made in the case of
the abduction and forcible return to Türkiye
of seven Turkish teachers by Moldovan
security services in 2018, beyond the fining
in 2020 of the former director of the Security
and Intelligence Service (SIS) for a related
economic offence.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION

RIGHT TO PRIVACY

The Sor party, the main driving force behind
ongoing anti-government protests since
2022, was declared “unconstitutional” by the
Constitutional Court and banned, accused of
seeking to destabilize Moldova in collusion
with Russia. Its five serving MPs remained in
parliament as independents. Many party
members left and joined the Shansa party.
On 3 November, the Commission for
Exceptional Situations (a body whose formal
remit is limited to immigration and energy
security) banned members of the Shansa
party from standing in the 5 November local
elections.

The Laws on the Security and Intelligence
Service and on Counter-Intelligence Activities,
adopted by parliament on 8 June and 7 July
respectively, reflected critical comments on
their earlier drafts by the Council of Europe’s
Venice Commission and Moldovan civil
society. The revised laws tamed the
government’s intention to give the SIS
extensive and vaguely defined powers to
engage in covert surveillance and
interception of private communications. The
new laws mandated judicial approval for such
measures, although some legal provisions
remained general and open to abusive
interpretation.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Institutional causes of torture and other illtreatment in detention remained
unaddressed. Detainees in adult and juvenile
penitentiary institutions continued to suffer
overcrowding, unsanitary and otherwise
inadequate detention conditions and poor
health provision.

IMPUNITY
Impunity remained endemic for past human
rights violations by members of law
enforcement agencies.
The NGO Legal Resources Centre from
Moldova (LRCM) analysed decisions by the
Supreme Court from July 2013 to February
2022 and concluded that court hearings in
alleged torture cases took considerably longer
compared with other criminal cases, and
resulted in an acquittal rate 13 times higher
and more lenient sentences. LRCM believed
the likely cause was judges’ fear of the
suspects or collusion between judges,
suspects and the prosecution. No plans to

The State of the World’s Human Rights

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In October, the SIS extrajudicially blocked
access to 22 (mostly Russia-based) online
media platforms and suspended
broadcasting by six television channels,
ostensibly for publishing information “that
may cause tension or social conflict”,
according to the head of the SIS.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In June, a Pride march took place in the
capital, Chișinău, bringing together some 500
participants. Despite the mayor’s threats to
ban the event, it proceeded without incident.
Discrimination against openly LGBTI people
remained commonplace, however, as did
homophobic statements by religious activists
and some officials.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In January, for the first time, the government
enacted the Temporary Protection regime
envisaged under the 2008 Law on Asylum.

263

This required Ukrainians and other refugees
falling under its provisions to apply for
protection within 90 days of arriving at the
border. Previously, refugees’ status and rights
were administered under state of emergency
legislation, by a Commission for Exceptional
Situations, and via derogation from national
legislation, such as by lifting limitations
concerning the right to work and access to
essential services. National and international
NGOs raised concerns that many refugees
risked losing access to employment and
certain other rights due to the tight deadline,
poor information, lack of proof of residence,
or other bureaucratic requirements. As of 3
December, Moldova was hosting 112,811
refugees from Ukraine.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
According to the UN Development
Programme, Moldova was “one of Europe’s
most climate change-vulnerable countries,
particularly prone to floods and droughts”,
with 80% of its territory having been affected
by floods over the past two decades. An
extreme heatwave was recorded in the
summer.
On 30 August, the government adopted the
National Climate Change Adaptation
Programme until 2030 and its Action Plan,
aimed at aligning the country with global
efforts to limit the negative impacts of climate
change.

TRANSDNIESTRIA REGION
IMPUNITY
In July, the local Communist Party leader,
Oleg Khorzhan, was found dead with stab
wounds in his home. He had been released
in 2022 on completing a sentence imposed
in 2018 for an alleged assault on de facto law
enforcement officers. Oleg Khorzhan was a
public critic of the de facto authorities, and
reported on human rights abuses in prison.
No effective investigation into his death had
been carried out by year’s end.

264

MONGOLIA
Mongolia
Criminal convictions against peaceful
protesters were upheld. Authorities
restricted the right to peaceful assembly of
LGBTI people. Arbitrary detention was
common and concerns about confessions
obtained under duress persisted. The
authorities failed to protect herder
communities from environmental
degradation caused by mining operations.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
In January, an appeal court confirmed the
convictions of five activists belonging to the
groups “No War” and “No Double Standard”.
They were sentenced in November 2022 to
12 months’ confinement to their districts of
residence for resisting a law enforcement
officer during a peaceful demonstration in
October 2021. In April, the Supreme Court
dismissed a further appeal by the five.
Following a public outcry, on 27 January the
President vetoed the Protection of Human
Rights on Social Networks bill, which
provided the government with new powers to
monitor and delete social media content and
to suspend and delete accounts on grounds
of protecting “national unity” and “state
secrets”. The bill was adopted by parliament
without public consultation on 20 January.1
According to the LGBT Centre Mongolia, the
authorities refused to allow a march in
support of LGBTI rights to take place during
the Equality and Pride Days in August.

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND TORTURE
AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention raised concerns about procedural
guarantees, including the high percentage of
arrests conducted without advance warrants
particularly by specialized agencies such as
the General Intelligence Agency and the
Independent Authority Against Corruption,
and about continued reports of confessions

The State of the World’s Human Rights

obtained under duress. Other concerns
raised included the failure to provide defence
lawyers with full and timely access to their
clients’ files and its impact on their ability to
effectively challenge the necessity of pretrial
detention.

June’s parliamentary elections, a coalition
government focusing on economic and
judicial reform was formed in late October. In
November, parliament elected the seventh
constitutional court judge, ending months of
deadlock.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION

Coal and other mining operations in the Gobi
region continued to cause environmental
damage and negatively impact the health and
livelihoods of herder communities. A new
report by the NGO Forum-Asia, on the
impacts of mining operations in Dornogovi
province, found that dust and noise pollution
and failure to safely manage hazardous waste
had resulted in allergies, infections,
respiratory and mental health problems
among nomadic herders, as well as the
shrinkage of available pasture and declining
livestock health.

RIGHT TO WATER
In May, following investigations by the
mayor’s office into hundreds of complaints
from residents in the Khan-Uul district of the
capital, Ulaanbaatar, about the poor quality of
drinking water and resulting ill health,
including rashes and stomach problems, it
was announced that state officials and
companies responsible for installing the water
pipes will be held accountable.
1. “Mongolia: The government of Mongolia is inadequately
implementing its obligation to protect freedom of expression”, 17 July
(Mongolian only)

MONTENEGRO
Montenegro
The UN Human Rights Council urged
Montenegro to effectively prosecute war
crimes, promptly investigate torture, and
strengthen the judiciary.

BACKGROUND

The only active war crimes prosecution
continued against a former Bosnian Serb
Army soldier, indicted for rape and murder in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1992.
The European Court of Human Rights failed
to recognize as victims the relatives of at least
66 forcibly disappeared Bosniak refugees
deported to Republika Srpska in 1992 – and
most of them murdered – on the grounds
that they had received state compensation,
and that the nine police officers responsible
had been acquitted of war crimes. The 2012
proceedings had failed to respect
international humanitarian law.
A legislative amendment adopted in May,
which denied compensation to civilian war
victims killed or forcibly disappeared outside
Montenegro, was withdrawn in December,
and a new amendment was proposed to
include all civilian war victims. This would
include relatives of the 20 passengers
abducted in 1993 by Bosnian-Serb
paramilitaries from a train travelling through
Bosnia and Herzegovina, then murdered.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In July, the European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture urged Montenegro to
end the culture of impunity for torture and
other ill-treatment, ensuring that all
allegations were effectively investigated.
Some 200 complaints remained outstanding.
After nine months’ inaction, the interior
minister suspended police officers accused
of torturing Marko Boljević and Benjamin
Mugoša; proceedings opened in April and
May, respectively. In October, the refusal to
prosecute 10 police officers for the torture of
Jovan Grujičić’ was finally reversed.

Presidential elections in April ended Milo
Djukanović’s three-decade rule. Following

The State of the World’s Human Rights

265

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Press freedom improved, but journalists
rarely received replies to freedom of
information requests. Impunity persisted for
attacks on journalists, including the 2004
murder of Duško Jovanović, editor of Dan
newspaper.
In January, the Appeals Court quashed
proceedings against investigative journalist
Jovo Martinović, wrongly convicted and
imprisoned for drug trafficking.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
The authorities failed to guarantee women
access to protection, support and justice in
cases of domestic violence, and
discriminated particularly against Roma and
Egyptian women and women with disabilities.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Lesbian and bisexual women in life
partnerships were denied reproductive
treatment, and the 2020 law on life
partnerships was still not fully implemented.
The government failed to draft the gender
recognition law, delaying implementation until
2024. Impunity continued for attacks, online
threats and discriminatory statements by
politicians.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
UNHCR, the UN refugee agency, observed a
35% decrease in refugees and migrants
entering Montenegro. Two Montenegrin
border police were indicted in February for
assaulting migrants in 2022.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In October, 27 NGOs addressed the
European Commission president, urging the
EU not to support the construction of a
liquified natural gas terminal at Bar,
potentially increasing fossil fuel use in the
region.

266

MOROCCO/
WESTERN SAHARA
Kingdom of Morocco
Authorities convicted at least six
individuals, including activists, journalists
and a lawyer, for peacefully exercising their
right to freedom of expression. They also
sporadically repressed dissent in Western
Sahara. Authorities tortured and otherwise
ill-treated some individuals perceived as
critics. Domestic legislation continued to
entrench gender inequality and criminalize
consensual adult same-sex sexual conduct
and abortion. Impunity prevailed regarding
the death of at least 37 migrants and the
disappearance of 76 who were attempting
to cross the border between Morocco and
the Spanish enclave of Melilla on 24 June
2022.

BACKGROUND
On 19 January, the European Parliament
passed a resolution on the situation of
journalists in Morocco, urging the authorities
to respect freedom of expression and media
freedom.
In April, the UN concluded its UPR review
of Morocco. The country accepted several
recommendations, including one to
strengthen the protection of migrants’ rights,
but rejected recommendations to criminalize
marital rape and decriminalize consensual
same-sex sexual relations between adults.
On 8 September, a 6.8-magnitude
earthquake hit Al Haouz region in south-west
Morocco. The WHO estimated that more than
300,000 people were affected in the city of
Marrakech and in the High Atlas Mountains.
According to the Moroccan authorities, 2,901
people were killed and thousands more
injured.
On 31 October, the UN Security Council
renewed for a year the mandate of the UN
Mission for the Referendum in Western

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Sahara, which still had no human rights
component.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Courts continued to display intolerance to
free speech, convicting at least six
individuals, including activists, journalists and
a lawyer, for expressing their views.
On 20 February, a court of appeal
sentenced human rights defender Rida
Benotmane to 18 months in prison on
charges relating to his social media posts and
YouTube videos dating from 2021, in which
he criticized abuses by the security forces,
called for the release of political detainees
and accused the government of oppressing
free speech.1
In May, a first instance tribunal sentenced
activist Saida El Alami to two years in prison
and a fine for “offending the king”, which she
denied. On 17 May, the same court
confirmed on appeal a three-year prison
sentence against lawyer Mohamed Ziane for
“insulting” public officials and institutions in
connection with a video posted on YouTube
in which he criticized the head of the security
forces.2
On 20 July, the Court of Cassation,
Morocco’s highest court, rejected the appeals
of journalists Omar Radi and Soulaiman
Raissouni, thereby confirming their six- and
five-year prison sentences, respectively.3
On 27 November, Casablanca’s appeals
court convicted Said Boukioud to three years’
imprisonment and a fine for Facebook posts
published in December 2020 in which he
criticized the government’s relations with
Israel.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
On several occasions, authorities restricted
dissent and the right to peaceful assembly in
Western Sahara.
Between 4 May and 20 June, police put
under surveillance the house of Sahrawi
activist Mahfouda Lefkir in Laayoune city in
the north of Western Sahara, after she visited
Dakhla city in the south of Western Sahara in
solidarity with activists there. Law
enforcement officers followed her every time

The State of the World’s Human Rights

she left her home, stopped activists visiting
her by beating them in front of the house,
and verbally insulted her and her family.
On 14 May, authorities expelled without due
process an Italian national, Roberto Cantoni,
a researcher investigating the use of
renewable energy in Morocco and Western
Sahara, from Laayoune to Agadir, a southern
coastal city in Morocco.
On 4 September, law enforcement officers
forcibly dispersed a peaceful protest in
Laayoune on the first day of the first visit to
Western Sahara of Staffan De Mistura, the
Personal Envoy of the UN Secretary-General
for Western Sahara. The officers physically
and verbally assaulted at least 23 Sahrawi
protesters, including two women – Salha
Boutenkiza and Mahfouda Lefkire – as well
as Bouchri Ben Taleb. They dragged the
protesters along the ground, and beat and
threatened them. On 7 September, law
enforcement officers in Dakhla arbitrarily
arrested at least four Sahrawi activists,
including Hassan Zerouali and Rachid
Sghayer, and detained them in the city’s Oum
Bir police station for seven hours, preventing
them from meeting Staffan De Mistura.
On 21 October, law enforcement officers
prevented the Sahrawi human rights
organization CODESA (Collective of Sahrawi
Human Rights Defenders) from holding its
first national congress in Laayoune.
Attendees told Amnesty International that law
enforcement officers used physical violence
against them.
Authorities maintained the physical closure
imposed in 2022 of the Laayoune
headquarters of the Sahrawi Association of
Victims of Grave Violations of Human Rights
Committed by the Moroccan State.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Authorities tortured and otherwise ill-treated
some individuals perceived as critics.
On 18 April, law enforcement officers
arbitrarily detained for 90 minutes Abd El
Tawab El Terkzi in Laayoune after he
appeared in a video of a Spanish tourist
saying that he was a proud Sahrawi and
favoured the self-determination of his people.

267

The officers tortured and otherwise ill-treated
him by cuffing and hooding him, slapping his
face, spitting on him, and threatening to rape
him and kill him using acid.
As of May, at least five people were denied
the right to read and write in prison; Rida
Benotmane, a writer and member of the
Moroccan Association for the Defence of
Human Rights; 80-year-old Mohamed Ziane,
a human rights lawyer and academic; and
three journalists, Taoufik Bouachrine, Omar
Radi and Soulaiman Raissouni (see above,
Freedom of expression).4
In February, Morocco forcibly returned
without due process Hassan Al Rabea, a
Saudi citizen, to Saudi Arabia, where he was
at risk of torture and other human rights
violations. Moroccan security officers
detained him on 14 January at Marrakech
airport at the request of Saudi Arabia, which
had charged him with terrorism-related
crimes.5

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Domestic legislation entrenched gender
inequality, including in relation to women’s
rights to inheritance and custody of children.
The Penal Code criminalized abortion
unless necessary to save “the mother’s
health or life” and if performed by a doctor or
surgeon. Women who had or attempted to
have an abortion outside these legal
exceptions faced six months to two years in
prison and a fine. The Penal Code also
punished anyone involved in providing an
abortion with one to five years in prison,
doubled if the person performing the abortion
habitually does so, and a fine.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Article 489 of the Penal Code punished adult
same-sex sexual conduct or “unnatural” acts
with six months to three years in prison plus
fines.
In April, Le Desk, a Moroccan digital news
outlet, reported that a French school in
Kenitra, a city in north-west Morocco, had
dismissed a teacher after a group of parents
filed a complaint in February for “apology of

268

homosexuality” after the teacher encouraged
students to accept same-sex sexual relations.

IMPUNITY
The authorities continued to fail to hold
anyone to account for the deaths of at least
37 migrants and the disappearance of 76
others on 24 June 2022 when Moroccan and
Spanish security forces used excessive force
against around 2,000 Sub-Saharan African
migrants attempting to cross the border
between Morocco and the Spanish enclave of
Melilla.

RIGHT TO WATER
In its 2023 Global Water Security
Assessment, the UN University classified
Morocco as water insecure. Water scarcity,
largely attributable to climate change, was
rapidly approaching the absolute water
scarcity threshold in the country.
In February, the National Human Rights
Council of Morocco published a report
warning of the decline of water resources in
the country. The Council called on authorities
to take urgent measures, including fighting
water pollution; investing in and developing
water infrastructure and alternative water
sources, such as treating wastewater and
desalination; and examining the impact of
agriculture, particularly of high waterconsuming products such as watermelons
and avocados, on water stress. Citing General
Comment No. 15 of the UN Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the
Council reminded Moroccan authorities of
their obligation to ensure that everyone has
“sufficient, safe, acceptable, physically
accessible and affordable water for personal
and domestic uses.”

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
World Weather Attribution reported that
Morocco experienced climate change-related
extreme heatwaves. In April, high
temperature records were broken in several
parts of the country, with temperatures
exceeding 41°C in some cities. On 11
August, the General Directorate of
Meteorology documented a temperature of

The State of the World’s Human Rights

50.4°C in Agadir, the highest ever recorded
in the country.

DEATH PENALTY
Courts continued to hand down death
sentences. The last execution was in 1993.
1. “Morocco/Western Sahara: Further information: Human rights
defender’s conviction upheld: Rida Benotmane”, 28 February
2. “Morocco: Further information: Human rights lawyer’s case to be
reviewed: Mohamed Ziane”, 28 April
3. “Morocco: Authorities must ensure Omar Radi’s fair trial rights”, 3
March
4. “Morocco: Denying imprisoned academics and journalists access to
read and write violates their right to freedom of expression”, 3 May
5. “Morocco: Man at risk of forcible return and torture: Hassan Al
Rabea”, 31 January

MOZAMBIQUE
Republic of Mozambique
The Al-Shabaab armed group killed 17
civilians; armed forces and their allies
carried out abuses against civilians. The
rights to freedom of expression, peaceful
assembly and association were repressed.
Police used live ammunition against
opposition members and supporters during
the election period, killing protesters and
bystanders; hundreds were arbitrarily
detained. A man died in police custody in
suspicious circumstances. The police failed
to protect people from kidnappings by
criminals.

BACKGROUND
Mozambique began its two-year term at the
UN Security Council in January.
The government established the Interministerial Commission for Human Rights
and International Humanitarian Law but
significant human rights abuses, driven by
the conflict in Cabo Delgado province, and
other structural factors, continued.
Although Mozambique was responsible for
only 0.02% of global greenhouse gas
emission, it was one of the countries most
affected by climate change.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Twelve people died and about 40,000
others were affected by floods in Maputo
province in February. In March, five children
died and 20 houses were destroyed as a
result of heavy rains in the city of Pemba.
Between February and March, more than
1.3 million people were affected by Cyclone
Freddy in Inhambane, Sofala, Manica, Tete,
Zambezia and Niassa provinces; floods
caused the displacement of 250,000 people,
killed 453 and injured 630. Around 51% of
those affected were women and children.
The authorities failed to provide timely
humanitarian assistance to the victims.
Municipal elections took place on 11
October in 65 municipalities.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
The armed group Al-Shabaab, the Defence
and Security Forces (FDS) and the Southern
African Development Community’s Mission in
Mozambique (SAMIM) committed war crimes
against civilians in the northern province of
Cabo Delgado, in the context of ongoing
armed conflict.
Between June and September, Al-Shabaab
carried out attacks in the Mocímboa da Praia
district. They killed a man and burnt 10
houses in Limala, and killed a woman in
Kalugo and 13 people in Naquitengue. In
July, the group beheaded two Christian men
in Litamanda in Macomia district.
On 24 July, an FDS officer raped a 17-yearold girl in Nangade district. Also in July, a
SAMIM officer shot and injured a man in
Ingoane, Mucojo district. The authorities
failed to open investigations into both cases.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
Security forces repressed protesters. In
January, a massive police presence involving
the Rapid Intervention Unit and police canine
units prevented 130 Namaacha municipality
staff members from marching in Maputo
province to protest at a five-month delay in
salary payments. One protester said they all
retreated in fear.

269

On 8 August, the Police of the Republic of
Mozambique (PRM) prevented striking
doctors from providing free healthcare
services around the Zimpeto neighbourhood
in the capital, Maputo. On 21 August, a
government spokesperson threatened
doctors still under probation with dismissal if
they continued striking.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
On 18 March, the PRM fired live
ammunition, rubber bullets and tear gas at
hundreds of people in the cities of Maputo
and Beira, attending a peaceful gathering to
honour the late outspoken rapper, Edson da
Luz. A woman, known only as Belarmina,
died after being shot, and dozens were
injured, including Inocêncio Manhique who
lost an eye; 22 others were arrested in both
cities.
In the period up to and following the
municipal elections, security forces used live
ammunition to prevent protests and
gatherings by members and supporters of the
opposition party, Renamo. On 12 October,
the PRM shot three people, one of whom
died, in Chiúre district, Cabo Delgado
province. They also fired at supporters in the
city of Nampula, wounding a child, and
continued the attack between 1am and 4am
the following day. Later that day, another
person was injured by gunfire used to
disperse Renamo supporters in Guruè
municipality, Zambezia province.
The announcement, on 26 October, that the
ruling party had won the election in the
municipalities contested by Renamo was
followed by two days of protest by Renamo
members and supporters. The PRM again
used excessive force to disperse the protests,
killing at least four bystanders. In Nampula,
Atipo Ajum, aged 14, was shot dead while
selling drinks on the street; Sabonete Saíde
was killed when he was hit by a bullet in his
house. In Nacala municipality, Issa Félix was
shot dead when he tried to cross the street,
and 17-year-old Braimo Arlindo was killed
when he and his father, who was seriously
injured, tried to shelter from gunfire. Dozens
suffered symptoms of tear gas inhalation.

270

Witnesses said that PRM officers in Maputo
were joined by plain-clothes officers and riot
police using AK-47s. On 27 October, a police
spokesperson said the killings were being
investigated but that the police would use all
means to prevent violent protest.
In December, at least one person – a 15year-old boy – was killed in Marromeu
district, and five others injured by bullets
fired by police in Guruè when the PRM used
excessive force to disperse opposition
supporters protesting the October election
results.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Security forces subjected people, including
protesters, to arbitrary detention.
Angolan national, Gerson Emanuel Quintas
(also known as Man Genas), his wife and two
children remained under house arrest in
Maputo, having been arrested by the PRM on
26 February after claiming asylum. Gerson
Emanuel Quintas had reportedly fled death
threats in Angola after apparently exposing a
senior police officer for alleged involvement in
drug trafficking.
In July, Macassar Bacar was found dead at
the 3rd Police Station in Maputo, the day
after he was arrested by the National Service
for Criminal Investigation. The police said he
died from natural causes, but a local NGO
suspected that he had died under torture.
In November, the minister of interior said
that hundreds of people had been detained
and charged in connection with the October
protests. Only 17 of them had been released
by the end of the year. Most of them
remained in detention (see above, Excessive
use of force).

RIGHT TO LIFE AND SECURITY OF THE
PERSON
Businesspeople of Asian descent or their
families continued to be targeted by
kidnappers demanding ransoms for their
release. The PRM failed to take adequate
measures to ensure their security. During the
year, entrepreneurs Sheinaz Gani, Sanjay
Dhalani and Firoz Mussa Judge were
released from months of captivity after being

The State of the World’s Human Rights

kidnapped in Maputo between March and
September. Firoz Mussa Judge was freed
after his family paid a ransom to his captors.

MYANMAR
Republic of the Union of Myanmar
The human rights crisis in Myanmar
worsened as the military authorities
continued their crackdown on peaceful
opposition and intensified operations
against growing armed resistance. Unfair
trials of pro-democracy activists and others
regarded as opponents of the military
authorities continued and more than 1,600
people were sentenced to imprisonment,
hard labour or death. More than half a
million people were displaced by internal
armed conflicts. Tens of thousands of
ethnic Rohingya people forcibly displaced
over a decade ago remained in squalid
displacement camps in Rakhine State. The
military authorities prevented humanitarian
aid from reaching them after a devastating
cyclone in May. Multiple countries imposed
sanctions on companies and individuals
responsible for supplying the Myanmar
military with aviation fuel which it has used
to carry out aerial attacks including on
civilians and houses, places of worship and
other civilian infrastructure. Rights to
freedom of expression, association and
peaceful assembly remained severely
curtailed and journalists were among those
imprisoned for their legitimate work.

BACKGROUND
Military rule continued after the ousting of the
democratically elected government on 1
February 2021. Myint Swe remained the
military-appointed president while army
general and coup leader, Min Aung Hlaing,
continued to lead the State Administration
Council. The military authorities persisted
with their campaign to eliminate all
opposition and international efforts proved
ineffective in stemming the violence and

The State of the World’s Human Rights

preventing grave human rights violations
against civilians.
The State Administration Council twice
extended the state of emergency by six
months and reneged on its commitment to
hold multi-party elections in 2023. The
National Unity Government, formed in 2021
by ousted representatives of the deposed
National League for Democracy-led
government, and armed groups collectively
known as People’s Defence Forces,
continued to oppose military rule. Fighting
intensified in central Myanmar, and in
October an alliance of three non-state armed
groups known as the Three Brotherhood
Alliance launched a large-scale offensive
known as Operation 1027, seizing military
bases, checkpoints and border crossings in
north-eastern Myanmar. They also targeted
locations where victims of human trafficking
were forced to work in cyber scams.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
Since the coup more than 4,000 people,
mostly civilians, have been killed by the
military in its attempt to assert control,
including at least 1,345 people in 2023.
Unlawful killings particularly occurred in the
context of military aerial and ground attacks
that constituted acts of collective punishment
against civilian populations, and also
following the capture of both armed and
peaceful opponents of the coup. There were
also reports of over 30 deaths in custody,
including as a result of torture or other illtreatment. The military intensified air strikes,
which were frequently indiscriminate or
directly targeted civilians and civilian objects.
Aerial attacks, that previously occurred
mainly in border areas, intensified in
Myanmar’s heartlands. Sagaing Region,
located in central and north-western
Myanmar, was increasingly targeted with
devastating consequences. On 11 April, in
the single deadliest aerial attack since the
coup, military aircraft bombed a gathering of
people who were inaugurating a new local
administrative office in the village of Pa Zyi
Gyi in Kanbulu township. At least 100
civilians were killed, including 35 children, as

271

well as 18 people aligned with armed
opposition groups. The military admitted the
attack but claimed that the high number of
fatalities was due to explosives stored at the
site of the gathering. On 27 June, an aerial
attack near a monastery in Nyaung Kone
village in Sagaing Region’s Pale township
reportedly killed a monk and at least nine
other civilians. According to media reports,
air strikes or aerial attacks resulting in civilian
deaths also took place in Bago Region and in
Chin, Kachin, Kayah, Kayin, Mon and
Rakhine states.
On 9 October, a military air strike followed
by mortar fire from ground forces on a camp
for internally displaced persons in Mung Lai
Hkye village, Kachin State, killed at least 28
civilians, including children, and injured at
least 57 others. Amnesty International
investigations pointed to the use of an aerial
delivered unguided bomb, an inaccurate
weapon whose effects cannot be limited as
required by international humanitarian law.1
Intensive ground operations also took place
in Sagaing Region and elsewhere during
which there were reports of extrajudicial
executions and sexual violence. A military
unit known as the Ogre Column was
identified as being responsible for particularly
brutal attacks including beheadings and
dismembering and mutilating the bodies of
victims. On 11 March, military forces
reportedly killed at least 22 civilians at a
monastery in Nan Nein village in southern
Shan State.

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND UNFAIR
TRIALS
By the end of 2023, the number of people
arrested by the authorities since the coup
had surpassed 25,000. According to the
Assistance Association for Political Prisoners,
as of December nearly 20,000 people
remained in detention, including political
opposition leaders and activists, human
rights defenders, journalists, students,
lawyers and medical workers.
Grossly unfair trials continued in which
more than 1,600 people were sentenced to
terms of imprisonment, hard labour and, in

272

some cases, death. Trials took place in
makeshift courts in prisons and in military
tribunals, and defendants typically had
limited or no access to lawyers. In May,
political activist and writer Wai Moe Naing
was found guilty of high treason and
sentenced to 20 years’ imprisonment. He
was originally arrested in 2021 for leading
peaceful protests and was already serving 34
years in prison on related charges. In August,
Byu Har, a well-known hip-hop artist, was
reportedly sentenced to 20 years’
imprisonment following his arrest in May after
he publicly criticized military leaders for
repeated electricity blackouts.
In September, the military authorities
arrested Kyaw Aye, the father of prominent
political activist Kyaw Ko Ko who was wanted
by the military authorities. The detention of
relatives of political opponents had become a
familiar tactic of retribution.
The military authorities announced several
amnesties during the year in which over
20,000 prisoners were released. Most were
held on criminal charges, although 2,153 of
those released in May were serving
sentences under Article 505(a) of the
Criminal Code, which criminalizes dissent
against the military and has been widely used
to crack down on peaceful opposition since
the coup. In one instance, the military said
that it was pardoning them on
“humanitarian” grounds to mark a Buddhist
holiday but threatened to reimprison anyone
who “reoffended”.2
Under a pardon in August, ousted president
Win Myint’s prison sentence was reduced by
four years and former state counsellor Aung
San Suu Kyi’s by six years. However, they
continued to serve eight and 27 years in
prison respectively, having previously been
found guilty of a series of politically motivated
charges.
Lack of access to detention facilities by
independent observers meant that
information on the health of detainees was
scarce, although in October the military
announced that family visits to prisoners,
suspended during the Covid-19 pandemic,
could resume. Individuals sentenced to death

The State of the World’s Human Rights

and those serving life sentences were
reportedly denied visits by family members.
Inhumane conditions of detention continued
as did reports of torture and other illtreatment of detainees. There were also
reports of political prisoners being killed or
going missing while being transferred
between detention facilities.

HUMAN TRAFFICKING
OHCHR, the UN human rights office,
estimated that around 120,000 people were
held in compounds in areas often controlled
by pro-military militias, bordering Thailand
and China, where they were forced to work in
cyber scams and illegal gambling run by
criminal gangs. In November, the Three
Brotherhood Alliance, which has ties to
China, said it had released victims from
compounds along the Chinese border as it
targeted Laukkai township, a notorious cyberscamming centre in Shan State. Many of
those forced to work in the scams were lured
to Myanmar from neighbouring countries,
including China and Viet Nam, with promises
of jobs and then forced, sometimes under
threat of violence, to participate in online
scams.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S
RIGHTS
According to OCHA, more than 2.6 million
people were internally displaced. This
included at least 500,000 people displaced
as a result of intensified fighting following the
start of Operation 1027 in late October. Many
displaced people continued to live in
deplorable conditions, often lacking essential
goods and services and at constant risk from
air strikes and other military operations.
Approximately 148,000 Rohingya and other
Muslim people remained internally displaced
and subjected to the long-standing statesponsored institutionalized system of
segregation and discrimination so severe that
it amounts to the crime against humanity of
apartheid. The majority remained confined in
squalid internment camps in Rakhine State
where they have been since 2012.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

The appalling conditions in which Rohingya
people lived was considered a significant
contributing factor to the number of fatalities
resulting from Cyclone Mocha that hit
western Myanmar in May. At least 100
Rohingya living in internment camps in Sittwe
township in Rakhine State reportedly died. In
addition to the severe impact on internment
camps, houses and infrastructure in the
townships of Rathedaung and Sittwe as well
as in Chin State and Sagaing and Magway
regions were also destroyed, disproportionally
affecting internally displaced people and
other vulnerable communities.
In the aftermath of Cyclone Mocha, the
military authorities impeded and, in some
cases prevented, humanitarian assistance
from reaching affected communities. There
were also reports that the military authorities
delayed authorizations to international
humanitarian organizations trying to scale up
their operations to provide humanitarian aid
in the region.3

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
Following evidence linking foreign and
domestic companies to the supply of aviation
fuel to the Myanmar military, the UK, the
USA, Canada, the EU and Switzerland
imposed sanctions of varying severity on
companies and individuals in Myanmar and
Singapore involved in the procurement and
distribution of aviation fuel into Myanmar. In
August, the USA extended the reach of
potential sanctions, stating that anyone
involved in this industry was at risk. In an
apparent attempt to evade sanctions, the
supply chain shifted from direct transport of
jet fuel from suppliers to Myanmar, to indirect
transfers through Viet Nam and Singapore.4
The Swedish H&M clothing company
announced that it would phase out its
operations in Myanmar following the August
publication of a report by the NGO Business
and Human Rights Resource Centre that
found serious abuses including low or unpaid
wages, gender-based violence and a
crackdown on union activities in Myanmar’s
garment sector. It followed a similar

273

announcement in July by the Spanish
company that owns the Zara fashion brand.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The military crackdown made peaceful
protest virtually impossible. Nearly 100
people were reportedly arrested for wearing,
selling or buying flowers on 19 June, the
birthday of Aung San Suu Kyi.
Surveillance was pervasive. People
continued to be arrested in connection with
online posts, creating an atmosphere of selfcensorship.
The military continued to use unlawful
association laws to prosecute perceived
opponents. In April, a court inside Myitkyina
Prison in Kachin State sentenced prominent
religious leader and human rights defender
Hkalam Samson to six years’ imprisonment
for unlawful association, terrorism and
inciting opposition.
Media freedoms remained severely
restricted. At least six journalists and other
media workers were arrested or sentenced to
prison terms during the year. They included
photojournalist Sai Zaw Thaike, who was
accused of disseminating information that
could cause public alarm or
misunderstanding towards the military
authorities. He was found guilty on a bogus
charge of sedition by a military tribunal in
Yangon’s Insein Prison in September and
sentenced to 20 years’ imprisonment with
hard labour. Sai Zaw Thaike had worked for
the online news outlet Myanmar Now, which
was banned by the military after the coup. In
May, a court in Yangon sentenced
photojournalist Hmu Yadanar Khet Moh Moh
Tun to 10 years in prison with hard labour on
terrorism charges. She was already serving a
three-year prison sentence for incitement to
rebellion and the dissemination of so-called
false news.
According to Reporters Without Borders,
over 60 journalists and other media workers
were detained as of December. On 10 June,
authorities revoked the media licence of the
independent news outlet the Ayeyarwaddy
Times for allegedly publishing information

274

that disrupts public peace and tranquillity. On
29 October, military authorities reportedly
raided the office of the news outlet
Development Media Group in Sittwe
township, arresting a reporter and an office
guard.

DEATH PENALTY
Death sentences continued to be imposed,
including on political prisoners, but no
executions were known to have taken place.
Death sentences against 38 people were
reportedly commuted to life imprisonment in
an amnesty granted in May.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
According to OHCHR, armed opposition
groups regularly carried out attacks against
civilians and civilian infrastructure. Local
administrators, civil servants and others
perceived as being affiliated to or
collaborating with the military were among
those reportedly killed. In some cases,
attacks involved bomb and grenade attacks
on public offices, including one in June on a
tax office in Yangon in which four employees
and two other individuals were injured.
OHCHR reported that the National Unity
Government had responded to its requests to
adopt measures to ensure that anti-military
armed groups affiliated with it comply with
relevant provisions of international law.
1. “Myanmar: 28 civilians killed in military air strike – new
investigation and witness testimony”, 13 October
2. “Myanmar: Follow ‘long overdue’ pardons by releasing all those
unjustly detained”, 3 May
3. “Myanmar: Military Authorities Exacerbate the Suffering Caused by
Cyclone Mocha”, 14 June
4. “Myanmar: New shipments of aviation fuel revealed despite the
military’s war crimes”, 1 March

NAMIBIA
Republic of Namibia
The right to freedom of peaceful assembly
was further threatened. The sanitation crisis
continued and acute food insecurity

The State of the World’s Human Rights

increased. A court judgment recognized the
rights of some same-sex couples.
Indigenous Peoples were denied rights to
participate in talks about reparations. The
right to a healthy environment was
threatened.

There was a severe sanitation crisis. In May,
a Center for Collaborative Investigative
Journalism report said 50% of the population
did not have access to safe and hygienic
toilets. The crisis was most acute in informal
settlements, where as many as 90% of
residents lacked adequate access to toilets
and were forced to resort to defecation
outside, resulting in environmental
contamination and the rapid spread of
diseases like cholera, typhoid and debilitating
diarrhoea.

outside the country, overturning an earlier
high court judgment. In July, however,
parliament passed legislation banning samesex marriages. If enacted, it could remove the
right of same-sex couples to have their
marriages recognized, even if those
marriages are performed in accordance with
the law of another country. This could nullify
the February judgment, in line with Article 81
of the constitution, which provides for the
reversal of a supreme court decision if it is
“contradicted by an Act of Parliament lawfully
enacted”.
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In February, seven UN Special Rapporteurs
raised concerns regarding the government’s
alleged failure to ensure the meaningful
participation of the Indigenous Nama and
Ovaherero Peoples in reparations
negotiations, and the lack of effective
reparative measures afforded to them. The
Nama and Ovaherero Peoples were victims of
genocide by Germany’s colonial rule.
Germany acknowledged responsibility in
2015 but refused to provide direct
reparations to victims, committing rather to
financing development projects. The Special
Rapporteurs said both governments had
allowed insufficient consultation and
information-sharing, which hindered the
affected communities’ ability to contribute to
the terms of the reparations agreement.

RIGHT TO FOOD

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT

Between July and September, the Integrated
Food Security Phase Classification reported
that acute food insecurity rose sharply,
affecting 22% of the population (579,000
people compared to 350,000 in 2022). The
surge was attributed to severe drought,
diminished crop and livestock yields, soaring
food prices, the economic downturn and high
unemployment rates.

In April, the minister of environment heard
appeals regarding Canadian-based oil
company ReconAfrica. In one appeal,
community organizations in Kavango East
and West regions claimed ReconAfrica had
not adequately consulted with them on its
drilling activities, had provided insufficient
information on environmental and social
impacts, and had failed to obtain their free,
prior and informed consent for the work.
ReconAfrica counter-claimed the allegations,
asserting that it had consulted with, and
obtained consent from, the communities. In
September, a parliamentary investigation
reportedly revealed that the company had
violated national laws.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
Protesters defied a high court ruling denying
permission for a youth protest against
unemployment, in the capital, Windhoek, in
March. Police arrested several activists and
politicians for their involvement after they
gathered at the Katutura Youth Centre for the
demonstration. They included social justice
activists Michael Amushelelo and
Dimbulukeni Nauyoma, and parliamentarian
Inna Hengari.

RIGHT TO HEALTH

DISCRIMINATION
LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In February, a supreme court ruling
recognized the right of spouses of Namibian
citizens to regularize their immigration status
based on same-sex marriages concluded

The State of the World’s Human Rights

275

Security forces continued to use
unnecessary and excessive force to disperse
and detain protesters, resulting in four
deaths. Authorities banned TikTok and
carried out arrests to limit freedom of
expression. The government failed to deliver
justice, truth and reparations to victims of
the 1996-2006 conflict. Torture and other
ill-treatment by security forces was reported
and authorities failed to carry out credible
and independent investigations into deaths
in custody. Gender-based discrimination
continued in law and practice. The marriage
of an LGBTI couple was registered for the
first time. Migrant workers were subjected
to abusive and illegal recruitment practices.

federation, the district police chief committed
to punish the officers responsible.
In June, police detained at least 16 activists
in Kathmandu protesting against corruption
related to government officials allegedly
collecting money from hundreds of Nepali
nationals with the promise of Bhutanese
refugee status and resettlement in high
income countries.
In August, police used unnecessary force
against Indigenous Peoples protesters, many
of whom were detained and assaulted. The
Prime Minister announced that those
responsible would be punished but no
charges were filed by the end of the year.
In November, the government banned the
TikTok app to “protect social harmony and
family unity”.
In December, one protester was shot dead
in Bara district and two protesters died due to
excessive force by police in Lalitpur district.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION

Security forces continued to detain activists
and individuals criticizing the government
and ruling party politicians, and frequently
resorted to unlawful force against protesters.
In February, five protesters demanding
justice for sexual violence cases were
detained by police. In March, Padam Limbu
died after being hit during a baton charge by
police at a protest by Indigenous Peoples in
Morang district. The government later
declared him “a martyr”, pledging relief
support to his family.
The authorities continued to crack down on
protests by victims of loan sharks, mostly lowincome farmers who gathered in the capital,
Kathmandu, calling for justice for financial
crimes. In April, at least 40 protesters were
injured by police using batons and water
cannons and at least 20 were detained. Days
later, the Home Minister apologized for the
excessive use of force by police.
In May, police detained and ill-treated two
journalists in Kanchanpur district who had
been reporting on a clash involving police.
Following condemnation by the journalists’

The government again failed to make
significant progress towards delivering truth,
justice and reparations to the tens of
thousands of victims of crimes under
international law and other grave human
rights violations committed by both sides
during the 1996-2006 conflict. The Truth and
Reconciliation Commission and the
Commission of Investigation on Enforced
Disappeared Persons, which had respectively
collected more than 60,000 and 3,000
complaints from victims, failed to resolve a
single case in 2023. In March, the
government presented to parliament a Bill for
the Amendment of the Investigation of
Enforced Disappeared Persons, Truth and
Reconciliation Commission Act (2014)
without adequately consulting conflict
victims. The Bill failed to comply with a 2015
Supreme Court ruling to bring it in line with
domestic and international human rights
standards and appeared to shield alleged
perpetrators from prosecution for some
crimes under international law.1 At the end of
the year, the Bill remained pending at the
lower house.

NEPAL
Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal

276

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Amid widespread concerns about
government misuse of amnesty provisions to
arbitrarily release ruling party affiliates, in
November the Supreme Court overturned a
Presidential amnesty to a man convicted of
murder, ruling the necessity of consent by
victims’ families.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Reports continued of torture and other illtreatment of pretrial detainees with impunity.
By the end of the year, there were no
convictions under the 2017 Criminal Code,
which criminalized the practice. In addition,
the authorities failed to investigate and
publicize reports of investigations into past
custodial deaths alleged to have resulted
from torture.
In January, three women were beaten by
government forest guards for entering a forest
to collect grass in Bara district; police refused
to lodge complaints against the guards. In
July, human rights defender Manohar Kumar
Pokharel was assaulted at the District Police
Office in Saptari district when visiting a
detainee. In August, two prisoners died from
alleged torture by police officers guarding
them in Sankhuwasabha prison. The
Sankhuwasabha District Court remanded
seven police officers and eight prisoners in
the prison while they were on trial for
offences relating to the two prisoners’
deaths.

DISCRIMINATION
Gender-based discrimination continued in
law and practice. In May, the President
authenticated the Nepal Citizenship (First
Amendment) Bill which denied women equal
citizenship rights. In a positive move for
Muslim women, in September, the Supreme
Court declared unconstitutional the practice
of “triple talaq”, Islamic instant divorce.
In June, the Supreme Court issued an
interim order to the government to register
same-sex marriages with “temporary
documentation,” pending its final verdict.
However, same-sex couples continued to
face barriers in practice as lower courts
refused to register marriages, citing a lack of

The State of the World’s Human Rights

enabling legislation. In November authorities
in Lamjung district registered a marriage
between Nepalis of the same legal gender for
the first time.
Despite provisions in law and policy to
address discrimination based on caste,
numerous incidents of discrimination against
members of the Dalit community were
reported, including by elected officials, with
impunity. In December the West Rukum
District Court convicted 26 people for the
killing of six men because of the relationship
of one of them with a girl from a dominant
caste.2

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Hundreds of families living in informal
settlements across the country remained at
risk of forced eviction by local authorities
without legal safeguards. In March, the
Kathmandu Metropolitan Office issued a
directive to people living in slums and
informal settlements along the riverbanks in
Kathmandu to vacate the areas within a
week. The Patan High Court suspended the
demolition order and ordered the
government, including the Metropolitan
Office, to arrange housing for those who
would be made homeless as a result of the
evictions.
The government failed to adequately
monitor, investigate and sanction the illegal
activities of recruitment agencies and agents
that charge migrant workers exorbitant fees.
Effective measures to prevent, investigate
and clarify the deaths of migrant workers,
such as through bilateral dialogues with the
governments of destination countries, were
not taken. Difficulties in accessing the
Workers Welfare Fund left many families of
deceased migrant workers without support.3
In November, an earthquake in Karnali
province resulted in more than 150 deaths
and damage to some 25,000 homes and
other public infrastructure. The government’s
relief support was inadequate, especially
given the harsh winter season, and at least
24 earthquake-affected people living in
makeshift tents died.

277

1. Nepal: Transitional Justice Bill needs to protect victims, not abusers;
proposed law disregards domestic and international legal standards,
24 March
2. “Nepal: District Court’s historic verdict a welcome step for justice for
Dalit community”, 7 December
3. Saudi Arabia: ‘Don’t worry, it’s a branch of Amazon’: Exploitation of
migrant workers contracted to Amazon in Saudi Arabia, 10 October

NETHERLANDS
Kingdom of the Netherlands
The government continued to enter into
third-country agreements on migration
despite human rights concerns. Border
police were found guilty of racial profiling.
Peaceful protesters faced harsh charges and
were subjected to unlawful surveillance
measures. Parliament voted in favour of a
consent-based definition of rape.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In July, the Netherlands was one of the
leading parties to an EU agreement on
migration with Tunisia, despite mounting
evidence of human rights abuses.1
The government still failed to automatically
recognize Afghan women and girls as
refugees.
In March, the Inspectorate of Justice and
Security (IJS) concluded that there was no
legal basis for using force against asylum
seekers in the Hoogeveen reception centre,
where people can only leave on their own
initiative if they waive their rights to, among
other things, accommodation, medical care
and counselling. In 2022 the IJS found that
staff had used “disproportionate violence”
against people held at the centre, including
children. The minister for migration disputed
the report of disproportionate violence and
noted that staff were authorized to use force.
In spite of minor improvements, the
Curaçaon authorities continued to detain
Venezuelans seeking safety and deny them
protection.2

278

DISCRIMINATION
In February, the Hague Court of Appeal
banned ethnic profiling by the border police,
ruling that the use of ethnicity in selection
decisions and risk profiles led to
discrimination.3

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
Throughout the year police used unlawful
identity checks, as well as social media
monitoring, drones and unannounced home
visits, as surveillance tools against peaceful
protesters.4
In August, seven climate protesters were
convicted for online posts calling on people to
join peaceful demonstrations in the form of a
roadblock on the A12 motorway. In March,
May and September, police used water
cannons against protesters on the A12 and
reported people attending with young
children to a child safety hotline.5
In November, the IJS reported that
authorities had failed to address serious
threats and subsequent violence in 2022
directed by a hostile audience at anti-racism
protesters in the municipality of Staphorst.
The protesters were demonstrating against
people dressing as the folkloric figure known
as “Black Pete”.6

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
In July, parliament passed a new sexual
offences law including a consent-based
definition of rape. The bill was pending
before the senate at the end of the year.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Although the government stressed the need
to phase out fossil fuel production and use
ahead of COP28, new plans for gas extraction
remained under discussion. Tax breaks
continued for companies using oil, gas and
coal, amounting to annual fossil fuel
subsidies of up to EUR 46 billion. In October,
parliament called on the government to draw
up scenarios for phasing out all fossil fuel
subsidies. In December, at COP28, the
government launched an international
coalition to phase out such subsidies.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

1. “EU/Tunisia: Agreement on migration ‘makes EU complicit’ in abuses
against asylum seekers, refugees and migrants”, 17 July
2. Curaçao: Little Improvement in Protection of Venezuelans, 7 February
3. “Netherlands; Court of Appeal bans ethnic profiling”, 14 February
(Dutch only)
4. Netherlands: Unchecked Power: ID Checks and Collection of Data
from Peaceful Protesters in the Netherlands, 31 May
5. “Netherlands: A week of climate demonstrations: five striking cases”,
18 September (Dutch only)
6. “Netherlands: Municipality of Staphorst falls seriously short in
tackling St Nicholas’ arrival”, 11 May (Dutch only)

NEW ZEALAND
New Zealand
Inquiries found multiple breaches by the
government in upholding the rights of
Māori. Human rights concerns persisted in
the criminal justice system including in
relation to youth justice processes and
conditions of detention.

BACKGROUND
In January, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern
resigned and was replaced by Christopher
Hipkins. In October, there was a change of
government after the national elections and
Christopher Luxon was sworn in as prime
minister in November.
Eleven deaths were recorded related to
February’s Cyclone Gabrielle, likely to have
been worsened by climate change.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
The Waitangi Tribunal, a body that hears
claims brought by Māori regarding Te Tiriti o
Waitangi and the Treaty of Waitangi, found
multiple breaches of the treaty obligations to
uphold the rights of Māori. In February, a
report on the administration of justice
published by the Waitangi Tribunal
highlighted inadequate funding arrangements
for claimants impacting the ability of Māori to
fully participate in tribunal processes. In May,
the Waitangi Tribunal released a report into
housing policy and services for Māori, which
found multiple breaches of the treaty in
addressing Māori homelessness.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In March, the government introduced a bill to
increase the length of time a person seeking
asylum who arrived in New Zealand as part of
a “mass arrival” could be detained without a
warrant from 96 hours to up to 28 days.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
A report on the Department of Corrections by
the Chief Ombudsman published in June
found that the Department did not sufficiently
consider the fair, safe and humane treatment
of people in prison in their decision-making,
thereby placing detainees’ rights at greater
risk of being ignored.
In July, the 7th periodic review of the UN
Committee against Torture raised serious
concerns including about the
disproportionate representation of Māori in
the prison system and conditions of
detention.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
The UN Committee against Torture’s review
referred to long-standing concerns about the
treatment of children in the justice system,
including the minimum age of criminal
responsibility, which remained at 10.
The findings of the Office of the Children's
Commissioner (now known as the Children
and Young People’s Commission) on two
youth justice residences included evidence of
ill-treatment of children in both, and
allegations of sexually inappropriate
behaviour by staff in one. In June, the former
Children’s Commissioner stated that
children’s residences were unsafe and should
be replaced by a system that is “fit for
purpose”.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
According to the research group Climate
Action Tracker, New Zealand continued to
have an overall rating of “highly insufficient”
based on its climate policies, action,
nationally determined contribution target and
climate finance.

279

NICARAGUA
Republic of Nicaragua
The ongoing political crisis was marked by
severe human rights violations, including
the stripping of Nicaraguan nationality from
political opponents, and arbitrary arrests
and detentions of human rights defenders,
religious leaders and Indigenous leaders.
Violations of religious freedom targeted the
Catholic Church and the closure of NGOs
continued. Impunity for crimes against
humanity prevailed. The persecution of
Indigenous Peoples continued with deadly
attacks by armed groups.

BACKGROUND
Since the beginning of the political crisis in
2018, there had been a violent and
repressive state crackdown on dissent. This
brutal suppression had resulted in at least
355 documented deaths, more than 2,000
injuries, a wave of arbitrary detentions and
unjustified dismissals, and the arbitrary
expulsion and deprivation of nationality of
more than 300 people.

ARBITRARY DEPRIVATION OF
NATIONALITY
On 9 February, the government unexpectedly
released and expelled more than 200 political
opponents who had been arbitrarily detained
between 2018 and 2021. The charges
against most of these individuals included
treason and terrorism-related offences in
judicial processes that lacked fair trial
guarantees.
The National Assembly (Nicaragua’s
legislative body) approved a change to the
constitution, stating that individuals convicted
of political crimes would lose their
Nicaraguan nationality. This policy was
arbitrarily applied to strip Nicaraguan
nationality from all those expelled in
February, as well as from others who were
already in exile, including political opponents,
journalists, human rights defenders, and
members of the Catholic Church.

280

In response to this, third countries offered
citizenship to those who had been made
stateless. Nevertheless, many of the exiled
Nicaraguans faced severe obstacles such as
language barriers and discrimination, which
obstructed their integration and access to
human rights including education, work and
health. The UN-mandated Group of Human
Rights Experts on Nicaragua (GHREN) urged
host countries to provide support, including
language education and vocational training,
and to combat discrimination, to facilitate the
effective integration of these Nicaraguans into
their new societies.
At the same time, the government began
the process of confiscating assets from these
individuals, without due process, leaving
many in a state of economic vulnerability.
The Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights (IACHR), labelled the deprivation of
nationality and asset seizure as “serious
human rights violations” and demanded that
the government allow the safe and voluntary
return of these individuals to the country
while halting these practices and restoring
the rights of those affected.
The Inter-American Court of Human Rights
reaffirmed provisional measures for activists
stripped of their nationality, including human
rights defenders Guillermo Gonzalo Carrión
Maradiaga and Vilma Núñez de Escorcia.
The court demanded that the state annul the
criminal proceedings against them and
refrain from detaining them.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
The IACHR identified the situation in
Nicaragua as one of the most severe
examples of closure of civic space in the
region, citing the mass cancellation of legal
status and forced dissolution of civil society
organizations.
Between August 2022 and September
2023, Nicaragua revoked the legal status of
more than 2,000 NGOs, meaning they could
no longer function in the country. This
brought the total to 3,394 since 2018.
During the year, the authorities closed the
Central American University, accusing it of
being a “terrorism centre”, and confiscated

The State of the World’s Human Rights

properties belonging to organizations
including the Red Cross and the Central
American Institute of Business
Administration.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
The UN reported violations of religious
freedom, with the Catholic Church targeted
by sanctions, harassment, and arbitrary
detentions of clergy and laypeople.
At least 119 individuals continued to be
arbitrarily detained after unfair trials,
including Rolando Álvarez, the Catholic
bishop of Matagalpa, who was sentenced to
26 years in prison for conspiracy and
spreading false news. Three students were
arrested in August on similar charges
following the closure of the Central American
University. In December, OHCHR, the UN
human rights office, condemned the forced
disappearance of Bishop Isidoro Mora and
the wave of detentions of religious leaders,
including Monsignor Carlos Avilés.

IMPUNITY
In March, GHREN concluded that it had
reasonable grounds to believe that authorities
at the highest levels, including President
Daniel Ortega and Vice President Rosario
Murillo, had since April 2018 been involved
in human rights violations and acts that
constituted crimes against humanity. GHREN
also recommended to the international
community that human rights violations in
Nicaragua be investigated and civil society
supported.
The OHCHR, the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights and the EU
called on President Ortega’s government to
investigate human rights violations and
ensure justice. By the end of the year,
however, no investigations had been
undertaken and the crimes remained
unpunished. Furthermore, the government
had continued with its repressive tactics,
making the defence of human rights from
within the country almost impossible.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Indigenous Peoples continued to face severe
human rights violations, despite international
condemnation. Arbitrary detentions and
unfair trials of Indigenous leaders were
reported, along with deadly attacks by armed
groups. Despite deaths and injuries in
communities including the Wilú, Musawas
and Sabakitang, impunity prevailed, with the
government failing to investigate and redress
the abuses. Repressive legislation worsened
the situation, such as the removal of legal
status for Indigenous organizations, and the
ban on public demonstrations included in the
law against money laundering, financing of
terrorism, and proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, which had been in effect
since July 2018.

NIGER
Republic of Niger
The rights to freedom of expression,
peaceful assembly and association were
severely restricted by the military who
seized power by a coup in July. Several
high-profile political figures were arbitrarily
detained, and women were sexually
assaulted in the aftermath of the coup.
Armed groups killed civilians in unlawful
attacks. Child marriage remained prevalent.
Migrants forcibly returned from Algeria were
extremely vulnerable. Rights to education,
food and water were obstructed by armed
conflict, exacerbated by climate change.

BACKGROUND
In July, the Nigerien military toppled
President Mohamed Bazoum in a coup and
took power as the National Council for the
Salvation of the Fatherland (CNSP). The
military detained President Bazoum and his
family in the presidential complex and in
August he was accused of “high treason”.
ECOWAS closed all land and air borders and
suspended all commercial and financial
transactions by its member states with Niger.

281

According to the Ministry for Humanitarian
Action and Disaster Management, massive
floods due to heavy rainfall caused at least 51
deaths, affected 161,252 people, and ruined
nearly 2,207 hectares of croplands.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
On 5 June, the weekly newspaper
L’Évènement was closed by authorities for
non-payment of taxes. Its editor Moussa
Aksar had been experiencing harassment
since 2020, following articles in the
newspaper related to the overpricing of
defence equipment by the Ministry of
Defence in the 2010s.
On 26 July, spontaneous demonstrations by
supporters of the president were violently
dispersed by the military in the capital
Niamey. Following the coup, the CNSP
suspended all activities by political parties
until further notice.
On 30 September, journalist Samira Sabou
was arrested at her mother’s home in Niamey
by hooded men presenting themselves as
members of the security forces.1 She was
subsequently transferred to the Criminal
Investigations Unit of the Niamey Police and
charged with “producing and distributing
data likely to disturb public order”. She was
released on 11 October pending trial.
On 3 October, Samira Ibrahim, a social
media user known also as “Precious Mimi”,
was convicted, and faced a six-month
suspended sentence and a fine of XOF
300,000 (USD 479) for “producing data that
could disturb public order”. She was charged
following a Facebook post in which she said
that Algeria had refused to recognize the
CNSP.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
On 23 January, Abdoulaye Seydou,
coordinator of activist group M62Moutountchi/Bourtchintarey: Sacred Union
for the Salvation of National Sovereignty and
the People’s Dignity and of the Pan-African
Network for Peace, Democracy and
Development appeared before the High Court
in Niamey for the “production and

282

dissemination of data likely to disturb public
order”, after he denounced the deaths of
gold miners during a military operation in
Tamou town in 2022. The prosecutor
dropped the initial charges and accused him
of “complicity in the arson of sheds and
houses used as dwellings”. Detained since
his High Court appearance, Abdoulaye
Seydou was sentenced in April to nine
months in prison and freed on appeal in July.
Following the coup, several officials of the
former government and the former ruling
party were detained without charge by the
military. In addition to President Bazoum and
his family, former minister of petroleum Sani
Mahamadou Issoufou, former minister of
home affairs Hamadou Adamou Souley,
former defence minister Kalla Moutari, and
former minister of finance Ahmad Jidoud
were also detained without charge.2

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
On 2 February, members of Islamic State in
the Sahel (ISS) killed 10 Malian refugees in
Egarek village in Tahoua region. Due to the
conflict in Mali’s Ménaka region, more than
8,000 Malians had sought refuge in Niger as
of February 2023.
On 2 May, a local militia killed at least 17
civilians of the Fulani community in the
village of Kandadji in Tillabéri region due to
suspicions of their collaboration with ISS.
On 15 August, according to local sources, at
least 20 civilians belonging to the Songhay
community were killed during an attack by
ISS in the villages of Tomare and Issile
Kotogoria in Tillabéri region.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Child marriage continued to be widespread.
The minimum legal age for marriage
remained 16 years for girls, despite
commitments to raise it to 18 years during
the 2021 UPR. According to Niger’s Institute
of National Statistics, more than three out of
four women in Niger were married before
turning 18.
In March, Nazira, a 16-year-old girl from
Daré in the commune of Matameye, Zinder

The State of the World’s Human Rights

region, ended her own life to escape a forced
marriage.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
During the week following the coup, at least
four women were sexually assaulted by youth
vigilantes patrolling Niamey, according to the
police and the Nigerien League for Women’s
Rights. None of the perpetrators had been
charged for these offences by the end of the
year.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Between January and April, around 9,000
refugees and migrants who had been
deported by the Algerian authorities,
including nationals from various West African
countries, arrived at the border village of
Assamaka, 200km from the closest major
town, Arlit, according to the International
Organization for Migration. In April, a UN
report declared that current human, logistical
and financial resources in Niger were not
adequate to care for all migrants. Due to the
regular expulsion of West African nationals by
Algeria, the refugee and migrant population
in Assamaka surpassed the village’s original
population, affecting access to health,
protection and food security for both
populations.
In December, the government abrogated a
2015 law that criminalized the smuggling of
migrants.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
Armed conflict severely hampered the right to
education. As of June, almost 958 primary
schools were closed or non-functional
nationwide, of which 891 were in the Tillabéri
region, according to the Regional Directorate
for Education. These school closures
impacted the right to education of more than
81,500 Nigerien children.

RIGHT TO FOOD AND WATER
Conflict and climate events heightened food
insecurity and water shortages impacted the
rights to food and water, affecting 2.5 million
people, according to the International Rescue
Committee. According to UNICEF data,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

almost 1.5 million children under the age of
five were likely to be victims of malnutrition,
with at least 430,000 of them expected to
suffer from the deadliest form of malnutrition.
As of October, 58% of the financial
requirements needed to implement the
humanitarian response plan were unfunded,
according to OCHA.
1. “Niger: Amnesty International calls for the immediate release of
journalist Samira Sabou”, 4 October (French only)
2. “Niger: Authorities putting rights at risk”, 26 October

NIGERIA
Federal Republic of Nigeria
There were sanctions against the media and
criminal charges against journalists for
alleged defamation. Defence and security
forces used excessive force, mainly to
disperse protests. People were tortured
during police interrogation. Authorities
continued to carry out forced evictions.
Authorities failed to put in place measures
to mitigate the impact of climate change.
All parties to the armed conflict committed
violations of international law. Cases of
enforced disappearances were documented.
Sexual and gender-based violence remained
rife. Men were charged under the Same-Sex
Marriage Prohibition Act. Resettled
internally displaced people lacked sufficient
food and access to basic amenities.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
On 14 March, the National Broadcasting
Commission (NBC) fined 25 stations over
their coverage of the 2023 general elections
for allegedly breaching the broadcasting
code. On 1 April, the NBC fined Channels
Television NGN 5 million (USD 6,540) over
views expressed by Datti Baba-Ahmed, the
Labour Party vice-presidential candidate,
during a TV programme. However, on 10
May, the Federal High Court in Abuja barred
the NBC from imposing fines on broadcast
stations.

283

On 18 March Chude Franklin Nnamdi, a
Labour Party supporter, was arrested by
police in Onitsha, Anambra state, for alleged
cyberstalking – in contravention of section 24
of the Cybercrimes (Prohibition, Prevention,
etc) Act, 2015 – over his criticism on social
media of Charles Soludo, governor of
Anambra state.
On 18 August, the authorities withdrew
accreditation from 25 journalists and media
houses, excluding them from covering
activities at the presidential villa in Abuja, on
vague grounds of “security concerns and
overcrowding of the press gallery area”.
On 7 October, the NBC issued Arise TV “a
final warning” for airing a programme
containing “unguarded incendiary remarks...
against the Legislature, Executive, Judiciary
and Mr. President.”
On 1 November, police – in collusion with
the Imo state government – beat and
blindfolded Joe Ajaero, president of Nigeria
Labour Congress, during a protest in Owerri
municipality over workers’ unpaid salaries
and pensions.
JOURNALISTS
The authorities continued to clamp down on
journalists and use criminal sanctions for
“defamation”.
In January, Agba Jalingo faced criminal
charges for alleged defamation of a relative of
Ben Ayade, former governor of Cross River
state. On 7 February, investigative journalists
Gidado Yushau and Alfred Olufemi were
convicted of conspiracy and defamation over
a report on drug abuse in Kwara state.
On 18 April, a police officer physically
assaulted Benedict Uwalaka, a
photojournalist, for covering a protest by
aviation union members in Lagos state.
Prisoner of conscience Omoyele Sowore
continued to face bogus treason charges at
the Federal High Court in Abuja for calling for
#RevolutionNow protests in 2019.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
Security forces used excessive force,
including in the dispersal of peaceful protests
and assemblies.

284

On 5 April, a police officer shot dead
Onyeka Ibe for refusing to pay a NGN 100
bribe (USD 0.13) in Delta state.
On 29 June, soldiers shot dead three youths
protesting at extortion and underemployment
in Afokpella community in Etsako local
government area, Edo state.
A leaked government memo dated 19 July
indicated that the Lagos state government
had in its possession the bodies of 103
people killed during the #EndSARS protests
in October 2020, and had approved their
secret mass burial.1 On 10 October, the
Lagos state government announced the
suspension of the burial.
On 6 September, armed police officers
teargassed and used excessive force
on University of Lagos students protesting
against an increase in tuition fees from NGN
19,000 (USD 24.76) to NGN 190,000 (USD
247.65). Olorunfemi Adeyeye and six other
students were arrested, beaten and
threatened with death by police.
On 9 October, police officer Drambi Vandi
was convicted in the High Court in Lagos
state for the murder of Omobolanle Raheem,
who he shot dead on 25 December 2022 on
the Lekki-Epe road after trying to stop her
car. He was sentenced to death by hanging.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
On 30 July, Faiz Abdullahi died in police
custody in Kaduna, Kaduna state, after being
tortured during interrogation. Abdullahi Tukur
Abba, a 17-year-old student, died in hospital
following torture during interrogation after he
was picked up by police on 5 August in Yola,
Adamawa state.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
On 29 May, President Bola Tinubu
announced the removal of the fuel subsidy,
leading to a steep rise in food prices and the
cost of living.
On 2 August, the Nigeria Labour Congress
went on strike over issues including low
wages and the eight months’ non-payment of
salary for university teachers. On 1 October,
President Tinubu announced a temporary

The State of the World’s Human Rights

monthly minimum wage increase of NGN
25,000 (USD 31).

FORCED EVICTIONS
The authorities continued to forcibly evict
residents, without adequate notice or
compensation or making alternative
resettlement plans, rendering hundreds of
people homeless. On 21 and 22 May,
security agents and the Kaduna State Urban
Planning and Development Authority
demolished structures belonging to
supporters of the Islamic Movement of
Nigeria. On 27 July, over 12,000 people were
rendered homeless and over 250 houses
were demolished in communities in
Oworonshoki, Lagos state.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
The authorities failed to put in place
adequate measures to mitigate the impact of
heavy rainfalls and floods, exacerbated by
climate change.2 In June, four people died
and 166 houses were submerged by flooding
in Abuja, and eight people died as
floodwaters submerged Agege community,
Lagos state.
In August, over 700 houses and farms were
destroyed by flooding in Cheledi community,
Bauchi state, and five communities were
displaced as houses and farmlands were
submerged by floods in Niger state. Also, in
August, farms in Ogbaru, Anambra state,
were affected by severe flooding, leading to
the death of over 25,000 birds in a poultry
farm.
Oil-related pollution and environmental
damage continued in the Niger Delta.3 The
clean-up by Shell remained inadequate.4
Shell had not explained how it planned to
address the pollution of Nigerian
communities linked to its operations.5

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
There were continued human rights abuses
by Boko Haram and Islamic State’s West
African Province in the north-east; assailants,
locally called “bandits”, in the north-west and

The State of the World’s Human Rights

centre; and “unknown gunmen” in the southeast. On 23 January, gunmen beheaded
Christopher Ohizu, a local government
administrator in Imo state. On 5 and 6 April,
gunmen killed at least 46 people in the
village of Umogidi, Benue state.
On 22 August, Boko Haram fighters
abducted over 40 women and girls in Mafa
local government area, Borno state. On 19
September, gunmen attacked and killed
about eight security operatives comprising
soldiers, police officers and members of the
Nigeria Security and Civil Defence Corps in
Ehime Mbano local government area, Imo
state.
On 24 December 2023, gunmen carried out
deadly attacks on 20 communities of Bokkos
and parts of Barkin-Ladi local government
area of Plateau state, killing over 194 people
and leaving dozens injured and displaced.
ATTACKS ON EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
The Nigerian state failed to protect
educational institutions from attacks and
abductions.6 In January, gunmen abducted
six pupils, aged four to six years, from LGEA
Primary School in Alwaza, Nasarawa state. In
March, herders attacked the Community
Grammar School in Alaropo Nla, Oyo state,
injuring pupils and teachers. On 22
September, gunmen abducted 30 schoolgirls
from their hostels at the Federal University of
Gusau, Zamfara state. On 4 October, gunmen
attacked Federal University Dutsin-Ma in
Katsina state and abducted five female
students.
On 9 October, gunmen abducted four
female students – Rahila Hanya, Josephine
Gershon, Rosemary Samuel and Goodness
Samuel – at the Nasarawa State University in
Angwan Ka’are community, Nasarawa state.
UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS BY SECURITY
FORCES
Defence and security forces committed
human rights violations during their
operations against armed groups.
On 24 January, an air strike by a suspected
Nigerian air force drone killed dozens of
civilians in Rukubi local government area,
Nasarawa state. On 25 January, at least 21
civilians were killed in an air strike by the

285

Nigerian air force in Niger state. In
September, security forces attacked
Umualumaku community in Ehime Mbano
local government area, Imo state, setting
several houses and vehicles ablaze, in
reprisal over the killing of members of the
Nigeria Security and Civil Defence Corps,
police and army. On 3 December, Nigerian
military air strikes killed over 120 people
attending a religious ceremony at Tudun Biri
village, Kaduna state.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Maduabuchi Obinwa, aged 22, disappeared
after his abduction on 24 April 2022, when
security agents from the Awkuzu State
Criminal Investigation Department raided his
house in Ekwulobia, Anambra state. Obiora
Agbasimalo, a governorship candidate, was
abducted by gunmen on 18 September 2021
while going to an election campaign outing in
Azia town, Anambra state. Sunday Ifedi and
Calista Ifedi, a couple, were taken by security
operatives from their home in Enugu on 23
November 2021, because of their alleged
membership of the Indigenous People of
Biafra. The fates and whereabouts of all
these people remained unknown at the end
of the year.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
According to the minister of women’s affairs,
as of October there were 24,720 reported
cases of sexual and gender-based violence
during the year, including 975 deaths. On 15
June, an eight-months’ pregnant woman was
raped by John Akpo at Irabi, Benue state. On
22 June, the police arrested Chukwuemeka
Orji for raping a 13-year-old domestic worker
in Aba, Abia state.
On 14 July, the mutilated body of 32-yearold Dorcas Shangev was found in Makurdi,
Benue state. On 15 July, 27-year-old
Chinyere Awuda was beaten to death and
dumped in an abandoned hotel pool in Awka,
Anambra state.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
On 27 August, police arrested 69 men for
organizing a gay wedding in Delta state. On 4

286

September, they were charged under the
Same-Sex Marriage Prohibition Act at a High
Court in Delta state and detained in prison.
On 19 September, they were granted bail,
with harsh terms, and their criminal trials
continued. On 22 October, 59 men and 17
women were arrested at Duwa Plaza
shopping mall, Gombe, Gombe state,
for allegedly holding a gay birthday party and
planning to hold a gay wedding.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S
RIGHTS
More than 2.4 million people remained
internally displaced in the north-east. The
Borno state government closed four camps in
July and resettled 11,000 households. Most
of the resettled people lacked adequate food
and access to basic amenities. On 6 October,
Dr Betta Edu, the minister of humanitarian
affairs and poverty alleviation, handed over
40 housing units to internally displaced
people in Zamfara state.
1. “Nigeria: Authorities must disclose identities of #EndSARS protesters
due for mass burial”, 24 July
2. “Nigeria: Authorities must act now to save lives amid threat of deadly
flooding”, 21 July
3. “Nigeria: Shell must clean up devastating oil spills in the Niger
Delta”, 2 February
4. “Nigeria: New government must ensure Shell’s sale of its Niger Delta
oil business does not worsen human rights abuses”, 26 May
5. Nigeria: Tainted Sale?, 26 May
6. “Nigeria: Authorities must uphold children’s rights to education in
northern Nigeria”, 24 January

NORTH KOREA
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Freedom of expression, already severely
restricted, was further curtailed by a new
law that carried severe punishments for
using or disseminating “South Korean-style”
language. Forced labour, including by
children, continued to be reported.
Government policies contributed to ongoing
food insecurity and healthcare provision was
inadequate. Arbitrary detention of

The State of the World’s Human Rights

government critics in appalling conditions
persisted and there was concern about the
fate of North Koreans forcibly returned from
China.

BACKGROUND
North Korea’s borders, closed since January
2020 in response to the Covid-19 pandemic,
partially reopened with the resumption of
passenger train services, buses and flights to
and from China in August. However, the
authorities reportedly further fortified the
border and authorized border guards to use
lethal force against anyone attempting to
cross it.
The movement of cargo between North
Korea and Russia was observed, including of
military equipment and ammunition which
was sent to Russia ahead of the summit
between North Korean leader Kim Jong-un
and the Russian president in September.
There were also reports of possible Russian
shipments of military supplies to North Korea.
A constitutional amendment was adopted
which enshrined North Korea’s policy on
nuclear force to ensure its “right to
existence” and “deter war”.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The government continued to enforce
draconian laws that prevented any form of
freedom of expression. It monitored and
controlled communication channels and
information flows both in and out of the
country.1
Harsh penalties were imposed on
individuals accused of engaging in
“reactionary ideology and culture”. Those
caught viewing, reading or listening to
content deemed to be “reactionary”,
including films, books and songs, faced
several years in prison, while those involved
in distribution risked life imprisonment or the
death penalty.
On 18 January, the government adopted a
new law to “eliminate” “South Korean-style”
speech (referred to as “puppet language”).
The Pyongyang Cultural Language Protection
Law imposes severe punishments for using or
disseminating “South Korean-style”

The State of the World’s Human Rights

language. Under article 58 of the law, “any
person found to be speaking, writing, sending
messages, or exchanging emails in the
puppet language or creating printed
materials, video recordings, compilations,
pictures, photographs, or scrolls using the
puppet language’s writing style” is liable to a
minimum of six years’ reform through labour.
If the crime is considered severe, the
sentence is increased to a life term of reform
through labour or the death penalty.
Parents are also liable to punishment under
the law by being publicly shamed if their
children are found accessing South Korean
content or imitating “South Korean-style”
speech. The law requires relevant authorities
to make use of public arrests, trials and
public executions to “break the spirit” of
those “polluted” by South Korean language
and culture.
There were reports of the arrest of two
teenage boys in March for watching South
Korean films, and concerns that they may
face execution.

FORCED LABOUR
Reports of the widespread use of forced
labour continued. According to the UN
human rights office, OHCHR, state
institutions continued to rely on the forced
mobilization of men and women to maintain
operations in construction, mining,
agriculture and other key sectors of the
economy. Forced labourers worked with
minimal compensation.
There were also continued reports of the
use of forced child labour including on
construction sites and in mines. According to
the UN, forced mobilizations of children for
labour took place at schools and in youth
organizations such as the Youth League, in
which membership is mandatory.
Workers were also sent to foreign countries
such as China and Russia to generate
revenue for the state. Former overseas
workers interviewed by the UN described
conditions that amounted to forced labour,
including tight restrictions on freedom of
movement and low pay, with most of their
wages taken by the North Korean state. They

287

also reported being subjected to extensive
surveillance, being required to undertake
physically demanding and sometimes
dangerous work, a lack of health and safety
measures and long working hours without
breaks or days off.

RIGHT TO FOOD
South Korea-based research institutions
reported that crop production in North Korea
increased in 2023. Nevertheless, food
insecurity was a persistent problem. In
March, the UN Food and Agriculture
Organization reported that a significant
proportion of the population suffered from
inadequate food consumption and poor
dietary diversity. The causes of food
insecurity were rooted in government
economic policies, regular crop failures and
possibly also related to international
sanctions. The situation was further
exacerbated by the government’s privileging
of military spending over ensuring that food
and other basic needs of the population were
met, and its reluctance to cooperate with the
international community.2
Strict border controls made smuggling of
food difficult with the result that food and
other essential supplies were less available in
unofficial markets, where a significant
proportion of North Koreans shop.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The right to health was severely
compromised. The government’s response to
the Covid-19 pandemic remained highly
inadequate and healthcare treatment and
essential medicines were often unavailable.
Childhood vaccines remained in short
supply, although following the temporary
resumption of railway freight operations
between China and North Korea in late 2022,
vaccines were delivered. UNICEF reported
that over 350,000 children and 150,000
pregnant women received vaccinations in
March in a “catch-up immunization
campaign”. This followed the reported failure
in 2022 to make available the third dose of
diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis-containing
vaccine, necessary for full immunization

288

against these diseases, due to country-wide
lack of stock.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Although the constitution, penal code and
other laws contain explicit prohibitions
against arbitrary arrest and detention, in
practice the right to liberty and security of the
person and the right to a fair trial were
routinely violated. There was a pervasive fear
of falling foul of the authorities and of being
denounced by fellow citizens, and the
government frequently used arbitrary arrest
and detention as a means of suppressing
opposition or perceived dissent.3
Political prison camps (kwanliso) were
believed to remain in operation, although the
authorities continued to deny their existence.
Those detained in the camps included
thousands of people who had expressed
dissenting views or otherwise criticized the
government. Prisoners in the camps were
subjected to forced labour and inhumane
conditions.
There were serious concerns about the fate
of hundreds of people, mainly women, who
the Chinese authorities reportedly forcibly
returned to North Korea in October. North
Korean authorities regard anyone who
escapes the country as “criminals” or
“traitors” for “illegally” crossing the border. In
the past, returnees have been arbitrarily
detained and subjected to torture and other
ill-treatment (see China entry).
1. “North Korea: Deteriorating human rights situation calls for
international attention”, 7 February
2. “North Korea: UN Security Council meeting must refocus attention on
neglected human rights situation”, 17 March
3. North Korea, 60+ Voices – Reflecting on Everyday Lives in North
Korea, revised edition, 11 October

NORTH MACEDONIA
Republic of North Macedonia
Impunity and ill-treatment persisted.
Women’s rights activists and supporters of
the Gender Equality Act were vilified by

The State of the World’s Human Rights

religious bodies; online threats were
pervasive. Systemic discrimination against
Roma resulted in a preventable death.

BACKGROUND
Bulgaria’s 2021 veto on North Macedonia’s
accession to the EU remained, after
parliament failed in August to agree a
constitutional amendment enshrining
Bulgarians as “constituent people”.

IMPUNITY
In February, the European Court of Human
Rights dismissed pardons issued in 2016 to
56 former minsters and government officials
by then-president Gjorge Ivanov. In March,
the justice minister subsequently renewed
efforts to extradite former prime minister
Nikola Gruevski from Hungary to stand trial in
nine criminal cases.
In October, several prosecutions against
former officials were discontinued after the
government reduced sentences for criminal
offences including “abuse of office” and
participating in a “criminal enterprise”. The
officials included former secret police chief
Sašo Mijalkov and others awaiting retrial for
the illegal wiretapping of more than 4,200
individuals, including journalists.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
A state of emergency was declared in
Idrizovo prison in June, and the police and
army were drafted in after chronic
understaffing led to security threats. In 2021,
the European Committee for the Prevention
of Torture had identified sections of the
prison as inhumane, overcrowded and
unsanitary.
An underfunded National Preventive
Mechanism, inadequate training and
investigations, and a lack of implementation
of an independent oversight mechanism for
guards and police enabled impunity for
torture and other ill-treatment.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

were subjected to strategic lawsuits against
public participation. In October, Investigative
Reporting Lab Macedonia was fined for
alleging that a former vice-president was
responsible for air pollution.
Online threats against female journalists
increased. The authorities had taken no
action against a religious official who in July
explicitly threatened to maim journalist Rita
Behadini after she had criticized attacks on
feminism by religious bodies.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Six women were killed by family members or
a former partner. In February, the criminal
code was harmonized with the Council of
Europe’s Convention on preventing and
combating violence against women and
domestic violence (Istanbul Convention),
recognizing gender-based violence and
introducing stalking and sexual harassment
as offences. In September, the Council of
Europe’s monitoring body GREVIO advocated
adding psychological violence and further
offences, and criticized the police and social
welfare bodies for failing to implement the
Istanbul Convention.
The Istanbul Convention and proposed
Gender Equality Act were strongly opposed
by the Macedonian Orthodox Church (MOC),
other religious bodies, some local authorities
and political parties.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Threats to life – mainly online – before Skopje
Pride in June, were followed by a massive
protest by the MOC and other religious
communities against the proposed Gender
Equality Act and Law on Birth Registry.
Threats were so severe that the Macedonian
Helsinki Committee produced a safety guide
for LGBTI people.
In September, a man was sentenced to two
years’ imprisonment for seriously injuring the
president of LGBTI United in Skopje in
August 2022. The sentence reflected the
discriminatory nature of the attack.

A new Law on Civil Liability for Insult and
Defamation reduced fines imposed on
journalists; however, investigative journalists

The State of the World’s Human Rights

289

DISCRIMINATION
ROMA
Systemic discrimination against Roma
continued, including in segregated
education, access to adequate housing and
water, and within the criminal justice system.
In May, Mehmet Kamber, a 20-year-old
Romani man, died in hospital after being
denied treatment for hypoglycemia because
he lacked an identity card, despite having his
birth certificate. In September, the
Commission for Prevention and Protection
Against Discrimination recommended the
Ministry of Interior amend legislation that
prevents Roma living in informal
communities from obtaining identity cards.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
UNHCR, the UN refugee agency, reported
that 11,645 refugees and migrants had
entered the country by 30 November, less
than half those in 2022. Border police
continued to arbitrarily detain refugees and
migrants, most of whom were then unlawfully
pushed back into Greece. Others were
unlawfully detained as witnesses against
smugglers.
In April, Fatmata, a 23-year-old woman, was
shot dead by North Macedonian police near
the Greek border while travelling in a car with
her husband, an alleged people-smuggler.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In September, hundreds of people joined
bereaved families protesting at the noncustodial sentences received by hospital
managers convicted in June for causing the
deaths of 12 patients and two relatives in a
fire at the Tetovo Covid-19 unit in 2021. The
duty-doctor was acquitted. In the same
month, following mass protests, prosecutors
finally opened investigations into alleged
corruption at Skopje university oncology
clinic, including the unlawful sale of
medicines.

290

NORWAY
Kingdom of Norway
The Parliamentary Ombudsperson raised
serious concerns about inadequate
healthcare for people in detention
experiencing mental illness. LGBTI meeting
places were at ongoing risk of violent
attack. The prevalence of gender-based
violence against women and girls remained
high. Following a period of government noncompliance with a Supreme Court judgment
that wind farms on the Fosen peninsula
violated the rights of Sami people to herd
reindeer, agreement was reached with Sami
communities in the south of the peninsula.
Significant investments in new oil and gas
fields were approved notwithstanding
emissions reduction targets.

CRUEL, INHUMAN OR DEGRADING
TREATMENT
In March, a report released by the
Parliamentary Ombudsperson expressed
concerns about long-standing issues in
Norway’s prisons and detention facilities,
including over the use of solitary
confinement, inadequate mental healthcare
services and rising levels of suicide and
suicide attempts. Recommendations made
by the European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture in 2019, including that
people in prison should be allowed to spend
a minimum of eight hours per day outside
their cells, had yet to be implemented. The
most recent figures presented by Oslo
Economics in September showed that prison
inmates in 24 wards, spread over 17 prisons,
had not received this minimum allocation in
2022.

DISCRIMINATION
In May, an official report on the June 2022
mass shooting at a gay club during Oslo
Pride, which killed two people and injured at
least 21, found that the attack could have
been prevented had the Police Security
Service (PST) taken information about

The State of the World’s Human Rights

prevailing threats seriously. The PST
assessed that LGBTI meeting places were at
ongoing risk of attacks. Organizers cancelled
a rainbow festival for children during Bergen
Pride due to threats of violence.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In January, the Ministry of Justice and Public
Security launched a public consultation on a
proposed revision to the Penal Code
definition of rape. Human rights bodies were
concerned that the proposed new provision
criminalizing sexual acts committed without
consent would not fully comply with the freely
given consent standard required by Article 36
of the Council of Europe Convention on
preventing and combating violence against
women and domestic violence (Istanbul
Convention).1
The prevalence of gender-based violence
against women and girls in Norway remained
high. In February, the Norwegian Centre for
Violence and Traumatic Stress Studies
revealed that more than one in five women
had reported suffering rape through force,
coercion or while incapacitated, at least once
in their lifetime. The majority of victims had
been raped more than once, many for the
first time before the age of 18.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In February, week-long demonstrations in the
capital, Oslo marked 500 days of government
non-compliance with a Supreme Court
verdict declaring wind farm licences on the
Fosen peninsula a violation of human rights.
In March, the government formally
apologized to Indigenous Sami communities
that their rights to herd reindeer in the area
had been violated by the wind farm turbines,
yet the projects remained fully operational. In
December, agreement was reached between
one wind farm operator and Sami
communities in the southern herding district
of the peninsula. Mediation continued for
other projects.
Ongoing government tax incentives
encouraged oil companies to invest NOK 200
billion (almost USD 20 billion) in new
production, with 19 new oil and gas field

The State of the World’s Human Rights

licences approved in June, notwithstanding
an emissions reduction target of 55% by
2030.
1. Norway: Submission to the UN Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women: 84th Session, 6 – 24 Feb 2023, 9
January

OMAN
Sultanate of Oman
Prosecutions related to freedoms of
expression, and religion and belief
continued, and summons and detention of
government critics remained frequent.
Oman took no concrete steps towards
protecting women and girls from genderbased violence or ending gender-based
discrimination. A new labour law improved
some workers’ rights, but labour protections
for migrant workers remained weak.

BACKGROUND
On 21 March, Oman acceded to the Arab
Charter on Human Rights.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Authorities cracked down on individuals
critical of government actions and policies,
including those related to corruption and the
failure to address the rising cost of living.
On 9 and 16 August, security forces
summoned, respectively, businessman Hani
al-Sarhani and religious cleric Masoud alMaqbali for interrogation about their online
criticism of state corruption. Masoud AlMaqbali was released on 24 August; the
Muscat Primary Court sentenced Hani alSarhani to two years’ imprisonment under the
Law on Combating Information Technology
Crimes. He was released on bail after paying
a fine of OMR 600 (USD 1,550) and
appealed the sentence.
On 30 September, the Internal Security
Service summoned and subsequently
detained without charge activist Talal alSalmani after he appeared in a video calling
on the government to provide a better

291

standard of living, including improved access
to electricity. His whereabouts remained
unknown at the end of the year.
Oman made no steps to amend articles of
its penal code that infringe upon the rights to
freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly, specifically Article 269, which
criminalizes actions deemed by the
authorities as hostile to Islam or denigrating
of Islamic values; and Article 115, which
criminalizes broadcasting and publishing
material that would “undermine the stature of
the state” or weaken confidence in the
economy.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
On 21 August, Omani human rights groups
reported that an appeals court retried four
people in a case known as “Ghaith spaces” –
a space on Twitter (now known as X) devoted
to intellectual discussions. All four were
arrested in 2021 on charges of using the
internet and information technology to
provide material that “would prejudice
religious values and public order” arising
from their participation in online discussions
on freedom of thought, religion and atheism.
In June 2022, a first instance court
sentenced Maryam al-Nuaimi and Ali alGhafri to three and five years’ imprisonment,
respectively; acquitted Ghaith al-Shibli; and
referred the case against Abdullah Hassan to
the Specialized Court for review. Maryam alNuaimi was released on 20 April 2023 under
an amnesty. Ali al-Ghafri remained in prison.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Civil society actors lamented the continued
prevalence of the practice of female genital
mutilation (FGM), despite its criminalization
in 2019. In response to concerns about FGM
raised by the UN Committee on the Rights of
the Child, Omani authorities stated only that a
database dealing with the issue had been
established.
Civil society organizations renewed their
calls for the adoption of laws that criminalize
domestic violence and provide effective
access to protection and justice for survivors.

292

Oman failed to take steps to end
discrimination against women despite civil
society’s increased demands for equal rights
for women, including with respect to
marriage, divorce, inheritance, nationality
and child custody, as well as restrictions on
movement and the type of work allowed.
Abortion continued to be criminalized.

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
On 25 July, a new labour law came into effect
for private sector workers, of whom 80% are
migrant workers. The law introduced positive
changes, including lowering the maximum
working week from 45 to 40 hours,
increasing paid sick leave and allowing
employees to leave an employer if the latter
fails to pay wages for two consecutive
months. However, the new law fails to
safeguard against discrimination and
workplace harassment, including sexual
harassment. It continues to exclude domestic
workers, who remain governed by a 2004
ministerial decree that falls significantly short
of the guarantees offered to other workers in
the new labour law.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In May, Oman’s transport, communication
and information technology ministry
launched a programme to reduce carbon
emissions from these sectors, under phase
one of the national strategy to tackle climate
change that focuses on carbon neutrality
goals for 2030, 2040 and 2050. However,
Oman continued to rely on and produce fossil
fuels, including from a new diesel production
refinery that exported its first shipment in
September, and did not commit to phasing
them out.

PAKISTAN
Islamic Republic of Pakistan
Political volatility increased and authorities
continued their assault on dissenting
voices, political opposition and people
critical of the government and the military

The State of the World’s Human Rights

establishment. Human rights violations
such as enforced disappearances, arbitrary
arrests and detentions, excessive
restrictions on protests and violence against
religious minorities continued unabated
with little or no justice for victims.
Transgender people faced an onslaught of
violence, harassment and discrimination
following a vicious disinformation campaign
and the targeting of legislation that protects
their rights. Pakistan battled increased
incidents of extreme weather and natural
disasters due to climate change.

BACKGROUND
The deepening economic crisis was marked
by skyrocketing inflation which reached
29.66% in December, according to the
Pakistan Bureau of Statistics. Hikes to cost of
living and fuel prices severely impacted the
population amid rising political tensions.
On 14 August, caretaker Prime Minister
Anwar ul Haq Kakar took over ahead of
general elections that constitutionally are to
be held within 90 days of a caretaker
government being appointed. However, the
Election Commission of Pakistan sought a
longer timeline to update the delimitation of
constituencies, according to new census
results. In November, after intervention by
the Supreme Court, the election date was set
for 8 February 2024.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
Hours before the start of the annual march
by Aurat March, the country’s largest
women’s movement, on 8 March,
International Women’s Day, and a rally by the
opposition political party Pakistan Tehreek-eInsaf (PTI), the Punjab Home Department
issued a notification banning “all kinds of
protests, demonstrations and sit-ins” for the
following seven days in Lahore district. The
blanket ban was deemed unlawful since the
authorities failed to adequately demonstrate
its necessity, using vague reasoning such as
the “overall security situation”.1
The prohibition on protests was imposed
under section 144 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure (a colonial-era law from 1898),

The State of the World’s Human Rights

which has been used excessively by district
administrations to restrict gatherings. The
Lahore district administration had refused
permission for the Aurat March in Lahore
several days earlier on 3 March, citing
“controversial cards and banners for
awareness of women’s rights” among the
justifications. The decision was successfully
appealed at the Lahore High Court and
permission was granted before the blanket
ban was reimposed on the morning of the
march.
On 8 March, peaceful protesters at the
Aurat March in the capital, Islamabad, were
violently dispersed by police, and barbed wire
and containers were used to block the protest
site. Women and khawajasira (transgender)
people were injured during the heavy-handed
response. One person was killed at the PTI
rally.
Former Prime Minister Imran Khan was
arrested on 9 May in connection with
corruption charges. On the same day, his
supporters came out in large numbers
nationwide to protest his arrest. Some groups
forcibly entered the military headquarters in
the city of Rawalpindi and others set fire to a
military commander’s official residence in
Lahore. While there were pockets of violence
from protesters, they were met with unlawful
use of force by military and police. According
to media reports, at least eight people were
killed and hundreds injured.
In December, police baton-charged,
employed tear gas and water cannons and
arrested over 200 peaceful protesters of the
Baloch Long March, including many women,
children and elderly people, in Islamabad.
The protesters were subsequently released.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Authorities used the Maintenance of Public
Order Ordinance and the vaguely-worded
Anti-Terrorism Act to crack down on political
opposition. In May, authorities conducted
mass arrests and arbitrary detentions of over
4,000 people, including political leaders,
alleged to have committed crimes during the
9 May protests. Authorities stated they had

293

used geo-fencing, social media surveillance
and CCTV to identify alleged perpetrators.
A total of 103 civilians charged in
connection with the 9 May protests were sent
to trial by military courts in contravention of
their right to a fair trial and obligations under
the ICCPR. Although cases challenging the
constitutionality of military courts were
pending at the Supreme Court, the trials
continued. The National Commission for
Human Rights (NCHR) found failures in
arrest proceedings and prison standards. As
of 9 June, 295 cases were registered in
Punjab, the province with the most arrests;
52 were under the Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997.
Many protesters, including prominent PTI
supporter Khadija Shah who was detained for
over seven months, faced re-arrests despite
being granted bail. Many PTI leaders were
reportedly forced to resign from the party.
Human rights lawyer Jibran Nasir was
briefly abducted on 1 June. On 20 August,
lawyer and human rights defender Imaan
Mazari, as well as Ali Wazir, a leader of the
Pashtun Tahafuz Movement (PTM), and
other PTM activists, were arrested on
allegations of sedition, damaging public
property and obstructing government
officials. Their arrests came after their
participation in the PTM jalsa, or public rally,
in Islamabad on 18 August, and were in
violation of their right to freedom of assembly,
association and expression. Imaan Mazari’s
arrest was carried out in a manner that
contravened due process. Imaan Mazari and
Ali Wazir were released on bail on 28 August
but were promptly re-arrested the same day
on terrorism charges. Both were released on
bail the following month. Ali Wazir was rearrested on 14 November over allegations
related to making speeches against state
institutions, and then was released after eight
days. PTM leader Manzoor Pashteen was
arrested on 4 December after speaking at a
sit-in against passport and visa requirements
at the Pakistan-Afghanistan border in
Chaman, Balochistan. He remained in
custody at the end of the year.

294

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
On 4 February, the Pakistan
Telecommunication Authority (PTA) blocked
Wikipedia due to the platform’s refusal to take
down “sacrilegious content”. The ban was
lifted two days later.
On 5 March, the Pakistan Electronic Media
Regulatory Authority (PEMRA) placed a
blanket ban on the broadcast of speeches by
Imran Khan and suspended the transmission
of ARY TV, a private news network. PEMRA
accused Imran Khan of attacking state
institutions and promoting hatred. From 9
May, following Imran Khan’s arrest, the PTA
imposed an “indefinite” ban on mobile
internet and blocked major social media
platforms, including YouTube, Twitter and
Facebook. Although the authorities claimed
to have restored mobile internet on 12 May,
people continued to experience difficulties in
accessing social media sites. In December,
social media access was blocked for hours
across the country during the PTI’s “virtual”
rally.
Prior to the caretaker government being
appointed in August, Parliament passed at
least six laws and amendments that sought to
restrict freedom of expression and civic
space, including the space for parliamentary
debate and dissent.
On 15 August, President Arif Alvi signed
into law the vaguely-worded PEMRA
(Amendment) Bill 2023. The NCHR and
media expressed concerns that it could be
used to further restrict the right to freedom of
expression.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Violence against women and girls continued
to be endemic, with access to justice
remaining out of reach for many. Despite the
government’s pledge during its fourth UPR
review to enact the Domestic Violence
(Prevention and Protection) Bill 2021, it had
yet to make any concrete efforts to do so.
On 16 August, a murder case was filed in
Hyderabad following the death of a nine-yearold girl employed as a domestic worker.
Videos of the girl at her employers’ house
bearing signs of physical abuse were made

The State of the World’s Human Rights

public and the postmortem report showed
that she had been raped and assaulted. In
July, a 15-year-old girl employed as a
domestic worker was hospitalized with signs
of physical abuse, neglect and malnutrition.
In November a woman died in a so-called
“honour” killing in Kohistan on the orders of
a jirga (tribal council).2

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
As in previous years, enforced
disappearances of journalists, human rights
defenders and critics of the government and
military establishment were carried out by
authorities with impunity. Families continued
to publicly campaign for truth and justice for
their missing loved ones.
A spate of disappearances of government
critics followed the violent protests of 9 May.
They included YouTuber Imran Riaz Khan,
who disappeared on 11 May,3 and political
leaders such as Usman Dar. Both men
reappeared after four months and one month
respectively without being charged. No one
was held accountable for their or others’
disappearances.
Throughout the year there were many
reports of disappearances in the province of
Balochistan and of Baloch students in other
parts of the country. Two Baloch students,
Salim Baloch and Ikram Naeem, disappeared
on 4 July and prominent Baloch journalist
Abid Mir disappeared on 8 March. Ikram
Naeem and Abid Mir were released three and
five days after their disappearance
respectively, and Salim Baloch was released
after more than a month. The safety and
whereabouts of many other Baloch people,
including students, remained unknown at the
end of the year. There were also reports of
extrajudicial killings, including that of Balach
Mola Bakhsh by the Counterterrorism
Department in November.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Climate change continued to take an
immense toll on Pakistan, despite historically
its small contribution to greenhouse gas
emissions.4 The country had seen some of
the highest temperatures in the world in

The State of the World’s Human Rights

recent years and the WHO predicted that
heatwaves would intensify and increase in
frequency.
Research by Amnesty International found
that climate-induced heatwaves affected the
health of people in the cities of Jacobabad
and Lahore in ways that included heatstroke,
fatigue, breathing difficulties and fever. Those
living in poverty or working in the informal
sector with limited or no access to coping
measures were particularly affected. Robust
social protections were not included in
heatwave and disaster management plans,
and many people were not in a position to
follow public health advice such as reducing
working hours and keeping homes cool.
According to a report by the Swiss air
quality technology company IQAir, Lahore
consistently was ranked as one of the most
air polluted cities in the world, impacting
people’s rights to life, health and healthy
environment.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Transgender (khawajasara) and gender
diverse people were subjected to increased
incidents of violence, harassment,
intimidation and murder.5 Political and
Islamist groups led a dangerous
disinformation campaign against the
Protection of Transgender Persons
(Protection of Rights) Act 2018, which
provides legal recognition to transgender
people based on self-determination and
protects them from discrimination based on
their real or perceived gender identity. In
April, the Senate Standing Committee on
Human Rights confirmed the proposal of a
new Bill to repeal and replace the
Transgender Persons Act 2018 to “attain
consistency with the injunctions of Islam”.
The proposed Bill removes the provision that
allows for self-identification without
undergoing a medical examination, replaces
the word “transgender” with “intersex”, and
criminalizes the provision of gender-affirming
healthcare.
The Federal Shariat Court later set aside
some provisions of the Act relating to gender
identity, the right to self-perceived gender

295

identity and the right of inheritance for
transgender people, stating that the
provisions were “un-Islamic”. This verdict
was challenged before the Supreme Court.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Many Afghan nationals fled to Pakistan
following the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan
in 2021. Afghan refugees in Pakistan were
subsequently subjected to waves of arbitrary
arrests, detentions and harassment by
authorities, including the threat of
deportation.6 In October the government
announced a crackdown on “illegal
immigrants” and imposed a 30-day deadline
to leave the country. From September until
the end of the year, more than 490,891
Afghan refugees across Pakistan were
deported. Harassment, discrimination,
arrests and arbitrary detention of refugees
across the country intensified following the
announcement of the deadline. Detainees
held in detention centres set up across the
country were denied legal safeguards, access
to legal counsel or communications with
family members.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Religious minorities continued to be
subjected to violence and harassment. Vague
and draconian blasphemy laws were routinely
used to target minorities and allowed
extremist groups to operate with impunity.
A man in Nankana Sahib accused of
desecrating the Qur’an was dragged out of a
police station by a vigilante mob in February
and beaten to death. On 7 August a teacher
accused of blasphemy in Turbat was shot
and killed. On 16 August, after blasphemy
allegations were made against two Christian
residents of Jaranwala, a city in the district of
Faisalabad, vigilante mobs attacked at least
24 church buildings and at least 80 Christian
houses. Media reports stated that over 100
people were arrested in connection with the
violence and 21 First Information Reports to
initiate legal processes had been filed; police
claimed trials will start in early 2024. Ahmadi
places of worship and grave sites continued
to be desecrated with no accountability or

296

justice. On 19 January and 2 February two
Ahmadi mosques in the Martin Quarters area
of Karachi were attacked by groups of men.
On 25 July, an Ahmadi mosque in the Shah
Faisal Colony of Karachi was attacked and
anti-Ahmadi graffiti was sprayed on the
premises. Similarly in August, a media report
stated that eight Ahmadi Muslims were
arrested for allegedly “preaching their
beliefs” in Lahore. The NCHR reported at
least 34 incidents where religious sites of
Ahmadi Muslims were attacked between
January and September. A community
spokesperson told the media that over a span
of two weeks in September, 74 Ahmadi
graves were vandalized in the city of Daska,
Punjab province. In several areas of Punjab,
Ahmadi Muslims were prevented from
carrying out the ritual animal sacrifice on Eid
ul Adha, a religiously significant day for
Muslims.
1. “Pakistan: Blanket ban on protests in Lahore must be lifted
immediately”, 8 March
2. “Pakistan: Authorities must end impunity of tribal councils as socalled ‘honour killings’ continue unabated”, 30 November
3. “Pakistan: YouTuber and TV anchor forcibly disappeared: Imran Riaz
Khan” 23 June
4. “Pakistan: A burning emergency - extreme heat and the right to
health”, 4 June
5. “Pakistan: Reject proposed rollbacks on the proposed Transgender
Persons Act”, 17 May
6. “Pakistan: Government must not deport Afghan Refugees” 4 October

PALESTINE (STATE
OF)
State of Palestine
On 10-13 May, Palestinian armed groups
fired hundreds of indiscriminate rockets
towards Israel. On 7 October, fighters
affiliated with the armed wing of Hamas
and other Palestinian armed groups entered
southern Israel and killed at least 1,000
people, most of them civilians, including
36 children; took some 245 hostages and

The State of the World’s Human Rights

captives. Around 12,000 rockets were fired
from October towards Israel, killing 15
people there. During the year, Palestinian
authorities in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip repressed the rights to freedom of
expression, association and assembly.
Torture and other ill-treatment were
reported in Palestinian detention centres.
Members of Palestinian armed groups
summarily killed several suspected
“collaborators”. In Gaza, death sentences
were passed and executions were carried
out.

found that 96% of people in Gaza needed
basic support for survival. The effects of the
conflict also negatively impacted the
economy in the West Bank. In Gaza, Israeli
forces killed 21,600 Palestinians, according
to Gaza’s Ministry of Health (see Israel and
the OPT entry), while in the West Bank, they
killed 493 Palestinians, making 2023 the
deadliest year since at least 1967.
In October and November, Qatar and other
intermediaries negotiated the release by
Hamas of 109 hostages and by Israel of 240
Palestinians from Israeli detention.

BACKGROUND

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW

Palestinians throughout the Occupied
Palestinian Territories (OPT) and in Israel, as
well as Palestinian refugees, continued to
suffer the impacts of Israel’s system of
apartheid.
Less than 40% of the occupied West Bank
continued to be administered by Fatah, a
nationalist Palestinian party, while the
occupied and besieged Gaza Strip was
administered by Hamas, a nationalist Islamist
party, in the absence of national elections
since 2006. In July, leaders of the rival
Palestinian factions met in Egypt for a
“reconciliation committee”, with no
outcomes.
The poverty rate among Palestinians
reached 25%, according to the World Bank,
affecting particularly Gaza, where, before
October, 73% of residents already depended
on humanitarian aid. In January, Israel
withheld the transfer of taxes collected by
Israeli authorities on behalf of Palestinian
authorities. The resulting funding deficit
exacerbated poverty, with public sector
employees receiving reduced wages and
businesses constrained by Israeli restrictions.
The transfer of tax revenues to the authorities
in the West Bank partly resumed in
November.
Gaza’s economy and infrastructure
collapsed in October under the destruction
wrought by Israel’s military operation
combined with the tightening of Israel’s 16year illegal blockade. After the first month of
conflict, the UN Development Programme

The State of the World’s Human Rights

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS BASED IN GAZA
In May, Al-Quds Brigades, affiliated with
Palestinian Islamic Jihad, and smaller armed
groups, fired hundreds of indiscriminate
rockets towards Israeli towns, killing two
civilians in Israel and three Palestinian
civilians in Gaza, including two children.
Israeli forces had killed Palestinian fighters as
well as 10 civilians in Gaza on 9 May (see
Israel and the OPT entry).
On 7 October, Hamas fighters and members
of other Palestinian armed groups, and
armed individuals, entered southern Israel
and attacked military and civilian areas.
Video evidence showed fighters deliberately
shooting at civilians and taking civilians as
hostage. According to Israeli official records,
at least 1,000 people were killed, the majority
civilians. One of the sites attacked was the
Nova music festival in Re’im in south-west
Israel, where 364 people were killed,
according to the Israeli police.1 Among those
killed were Palestinian workers from Gaza
and migrant workers from south-east Asia.
HOSTAGE-TAKING
On 7 October, Palestinian armed groups took
some 245 hostages and captives, including
children and older people. Hostage-taking is
a war crime under international law.
Palestinian fighters abducted two-year-old
Aviv Asher and her four-year-old sister Raz
from kibbutz Nir Oz on 7 October and held
them hostage until 24 November. Hamas
released four hostages on 20 and 23

297

October, in coordination with the ICRC.
Between 24 and 30 November, Hamas
released 105 more hostages, some of whom
reported ill-treatment. The ICRC was denied
access to those held.
OTHER UNLAWFUL ATTACKS
Some 12,000 indiscriminate rockets fired in
the 12 weeks from October killed 15 people
in Israel, according to Israeli authorities, and
damaged buildings in Israel and Palestine. A
rocket fired from Gaza on 7 October killed
five children aged between 11 and 14 in the
Bedouin village of Kuhleh in the Negev/
Naqab in southern Israel. Some 120,000
Israelis were displaced from their homes in
southern Israel due to Palestinian armed
groups’ attacks.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
According to the Palestinian Centre for
Development and Media Freedoms (MADA),
assaults against journalists increased,
especially when they covered events that
were critical of the authorities. Palestinian
police generally dispersed independent
protests quickly, using excessive force.
WEST BANK
Palestinian security officers routinely
harassed protest organizers and dissidents
with threatening phone calls and visits. On 18
June, Palestinian Preventive Security forces
beat Abdel Majid Hassan, head of Birzeit
University student council. They then
detained him and fellow student Yahya Farah
in Ramallah for a month. The students’
families reported that they were tortured.
In October, Palestinian police used force to
disperse demonstrations in solidarity with
people in Gaza, in apparent coordination with
Israeli military officials. On 17 October, after
al-Ahli hospital in Gaza City was hit,
protesters in Ramallah, the West Bank’s
administrative centre, gathered to protest the
inaction of Palestine’s President Mahmoud
Abbas. They were dispersed with stun
grenades and tear gas.
GAZA STRIP
On 30 July and 4 August, thousands of
demonstrators in Gaza City and Khan Yunis

298

demanded that the Hamas administration
supply fuel and electricity reliably and stop
requisitioning welfare payments from families
in poverty. The demonstrators were violently
dispersed; dozens were arrested. Plainclothes officers assaulted a journalist
covering the protest on 30 July in Gaza City,
according to MADA. In Khan Yunis, police
destroyed the phones of protesters who had
filmed the events, according to journalists at
the scene.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
WEST BANK
Presidential decrees appointed favoured
officials throughout governmental and judicial
institutions in the West Bank, undermining
the independence of the judiciary.
On 5 June, officers interrogated the
directors of Aman, a coalition of civil society
organizations working for governmental
accountability. The directors were accused of
“defamation of high officials” after the
publication of their annual report on 17 May.
GAZA STRIP
In January, Palestinian police officers
disrupted workshops for journalists and
students organized by a women’s group in
Gaza City. Police interrogated staff about
violating rules on gender segregation, and
forced them to sign morality “pledges”,
according to testimonies given to the UN
commission of inquiry.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
According to the Independent Commission
for Human Rights (ICHR), which acts as the
Palestinian national human rights institution,
235 Palestinians were arbitrarily detained in
the West Bank and 61 in Gaza, where no
data is available from October.
In the West Bank, Palestinian legal services
organization Lawyers for Justice reported that
in June and July, at least 20 journalists,
political activists and lawyers were arbitrarily
arrested on charges of defaming the
Palestinian authorities, inciting ethnic strife,
and slandering the president.
Legal proceedings in relation to the 2021
death in custody in the West Bank of

The State of the World’s Human Rights

dissident Nizar Banat stalled amid
bureaucratic delays and intimidation of
witnesses.2

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
ICHR received 94 complaints of torture and
other ill-treatment in Palestinian detention in
the West Bank and 86 in Gaza.
In Hebron in the West Bank, Palestinian
forces arbitrarily detained 22 Palestinians on
23 May and tortured all of them, according to
Lawyers for Justice. Consequently, five had to
be hospitalized, their families said.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
On 8 April, members of a Palestinian armed
group in Nablus city in the northern West
Bank killed a man they suspected of working
for Israeli surveillance, the first killing of an
alleged “collaborator” in nearly 20 years. On
24 November, members of an armed group
in Tulkarem refugee camp west of Nablus
publicly killed two Palestinian men who they
claimed were “collaborators”. Palestinian
police made no arrests in either case.
In Gaza, armed men affiliated with Hamas
rounded up approximately a dozen men on
21 November, alleging that they worked for
Israeli forces, and summarily killed them.

DEATH PENALTY
The Palestinian authorities in Gaza imposed
new death sentences, according to
Palestinian human rights organization Al
Mezan. Executions of prisoners on death row
for “collaboration with the enemy” were
carried out on 7 October.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Women still did not have equal rights to men
in personal status law, which continued to be
subject to religious law. According to the
Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics, 59%
of married women and girls experienced
violence at the hands of their partner, and the
Women’s Centre for Legal Aid and
Counselling expected the numbers for 2023
to rise due to conflict and deprivation. Less
than 2% of survivors complained to the
police, and of those cases, 40% were

The State of the World’s Human Rights

investigated, according to the Palestinian
Initiative for the Promotion of Global Dialogue
and Democracy.
Sisters Wissam and Fatimah al-Tawil were
arrested without explanation on 5 January
from a safe house where they had escaped
their father’s abuse. Hamas security services
handed them over to their paternal uncle,
who drove them to their father’s home in
Rafah in the south of Gaza. They were
subsequently not heard from directly, as their
father held them captive.3
On 25 September, Palestinian police
together with UN agencies opened an office
for investigating and prosecuting domestic
violence in Hebron, after a similar office
opened in Nablus.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Consensual same-sex sexual conduct
continued to be banned in Gaza on the basis
of a 1936 British Mandate ordinance.
In September, after the UN Relief and
Works Agency (UNRWA) published guidance
to staff regarding treating all genders and
LGBTI people equally, the Hamas authorities
condemned the guidance for promoting
“deviance and moral decay”.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Palestinian authorities in the West Bank
failed to meet their goal of recycling 30% of
domestic solid waste, which was generated at
the high rate of 1kg per capita daily,
according to the Palestinian Central Bureau
of Statistics. Less than 10% of plastic was
recycled, and a third of solid waste polluted
the environment in unregulated dumps,
according to Heinrich Böll Stiftung, a political
foundation affiliated with the German Green
Party.
1. “Israel: Palestinian armed groups must be held accountable for
deliberate civilian killings, abductions and indiscriminate attacks”,
12 October
2. “Palestine: Justice remains elusive two years after the killing of Nizar
Banat”, 24 June
3. “Palestine: Grave fears for Gaza sisters returned to abusive father by
Palestinian security services”, 11 January

299

PAPUA NEW
GUINEA
Independent State of Papua New Guinea
The government introduced a draft media
policy that would give it additional powers
to regulate and control journalists and
media outlets. Law enforcement measures
proved ineffective in curbing inter-ethnic
violence in which at least 150 people were
killed and thousands displaced. Access to
adequate healthcare remained severely
restricted. A licence was issued to reopen a
gold mining operation previously associated
with serious human rights abuses and
environmental damage, despite these not
being adequately addressed by the company
involved.

BACKGROUND
The Autonomous Region of Bougainville
continued to push for the implementation of
the 2019 referendum on independence but
was hindered by discussions on the
reopening of the Panguna copper mine
which would represent the main source of
income for an independent Bougainville.
Foreign affairs minister Justin Tkatchenko
resigned in May in the wake of protests
against alleged racist remarks that he made
against critics of the lavish expenditure by the
minister and members of his family when
attending the coronation of King Charles III in
the UK.

give effect to these controversial policies had
not been adopted by year’s end.
In June, the government issued a policy
directive banning media outlets from
accessing parts of Parliament House, adding
to measures introduced in 2022 restricting
media access to government officials.

RIGHT TO LIFE
Long-standing patterns of inter-ethnic
violence that had intensified around national
elections in 2022 escalated further in the
highland provinces of Enga, Hela and
Southern Highlands. In July, the Enga
provincial government imposed a temporary
night-time curfew in an attempt to curb
violence. However, the violence resulted in
widespread displacement and more than 150
deaths were reported in August in Enga. The
national police commissioner issued a
directive in August authorizing the use of
lethal force against any person carrying
firearms, bush knives and other weapons in
the affected provinces.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Much of Papua New Guinea’s population
continued to be denied the right to adequate
healthcare due to the chronically underresourced health system. It was projected
that in 2023 only an estimated 72% of
people living with HIV would receive
antiretroviral medication, and more than half
of the at-risk population, including sex
workers, men who have sex with men and
transgender people, would not be reached by
HIV prevention programmes.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT

On 12 February, the government published a
draft National Media Policy that included
proposals to regulate journalists, media
outlets and the currently independent PNG
Media Council (PNGMC). An initial public
consultation period of just 12 days was
extended after the PNGMC called for more
inclusive consultations on a law that would
increase government control of the media
and undermine press freedom. Legislation to

In March, the Canadian mining company
Barrick Gold Corporation (Barrick)
announced plans and received government
permission to reopen the Porgera copper and
gold mine in the Enga province of the
highlands, where environmental degradation
and serious human rights abuses, including
rape, sexual assault and forced evictions,
took place before its closure in 2020.
Impacted Indigenous Peoples and civil
society organizations claimed that

300

The State of the World’s Human Rights

compensation provided by Barrick was
inadequate and that the company had failed
to address environmental contamination
resulting from previous mining operations at
the site.
In April, the finance manager and another
staff member of the Climate Change and
Development Authority, responsible for
coordinating national climate change policies
and action, were charged with corruption and
misappropriation of the equivalent of around
USD 1.3 million of funds intended for climate
change mitigation projects.
An investigation by an Australian media
outlet uncovered illegal logging in a protected
forest in New Ireland province by a company
that was promoting a “carbon credit”
scheme. Commercial logging in the area was
allegedly authorized by corrupt government
officials.

PARAGUAY
Republic of Paraguay
The Inter-American Court of Human Rights
condemned the state’s use of torture. There
were reports of illegal use of force, arbitrary
detentions, and criminalization of social
protest after the general elections.
Indigenous and peasant communities were
affected by forced evictions and exposure to
toxic substances. The judiciary rejected the
name recognition claims of six transgender
people. Sexual abuse of children and
adolescents and forced pregnancies of girls
remained a great concern, as did violence
against women.

BACKGROUND
Paraguay and Brazil began revising the Itaipú
Treaty, 50 years after it was signed.
Negotiations concerning the sale of energy
produced by hydroelectric installations on the
Paraná River did not include participatory
mechanisms.
In April, the Inter-American Court of Human
Rights ruled that the state had complied with
its judgment in the case of Ríos Ávalos and

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Others v. Paraguay, concerning violations of
judicial independence following the removal
from office of two Supreme Court Justices in
2003.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Restrictions on freedom of expression and
assembly persisted. The National Mechanism
for the Prevention of Torture reported
arbitrary detentions, unlawful use of force,
and torture against demonstrators
participating in post-election protests in May.
In June, a 22-year-old protester, Rigoberto
Luis Duarte Ríos, died after being shot in the
head.
In February, Alexander Álvarez Ramírez,
producer and host of a radio programme in
the city of Pedro Juan Caballero, was
murdered. His death was considered to be
related to his work as a broadcaster, but no
information had been released about the
investigation by the end of the year.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Impunity for torture and other ill-treatment
persisted. In May, the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights condemned the state for the
arbitrary detention and torture suffered by
Jorge Luis López Sosa in 2000. The court
ordered financial compensation and the
implementation of a training programme on
the prohibition, prevention and investigation
of torture.
Miguel Ángel Correa, a victim of arbitrary
detention and torture in the context of the
Curuguaty massacre – a forced eviction in
2012 that ended in a shootout leaving 17
dead, including six policemen – submitted a
communication to the UN Committee against
Torture, denouncing the Paraguayan state for
the inaction of the Public Prosecutor’s Office
in charging the alleged perpetrators.
The Public Prosecutor’s Office reported no
progress in identifying those responsible for
the torture and other ill-treatment of 35
people at the Ciudad del Este naval base in
2020.

301

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
There were persistent complaints and legal
actions by patients, particularly oncology
patients, due to insufficient resources in the
public health system.
Despite having been created by law, there
was no progress in the constitution of a
commission to analyse legal means for the
restitution of more than 8 million hectares of
land destined for agrarian reform and illegally
awarded during the military regime to its
supporters. The reform would grant
thousands of people the right to an adequate
standard of living, including adequate food.
Forced evictions of peasant and Indigenous
communities continued. The Paraguayan
Human Rights Coordinating Committee
reported that the 15 de Enero Avá Guaraní
Indigenous community, located in the
department of Caaguazú, had been evicted
leaving 20 families, including 41 young
children, homeless and living on the roadside
and vulnerable to other human rights
violations.
In June, a law was passed allowing the
transfer of Marina Kue lands to their peasant
occupants who had been claiming their land
titles for decades. Despite the restitution, 11
years after the 2012 Curuguaty massacre,
families of victims were still awaiting justice
(see above, Torture and other ill-treatment).

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
The National Plan for the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples continued to lack
adequate finance, which hindered its
implementation.
The Tekoha Sauce Indigenous community
of the Avá Guaraní Paranaense people were
still waiting for the restitution of their
ancestral territory, which had been seized by
hydroelectric power company Itaipú
Binacional, violating their rights as
Indigenous Peoples. The company appealed
a court decision that rejected an eviction
order to remove the community from another
area of their ancestral land.
In July, non-state armed groups invaded
and forcibly settled in Tekoha Guasu Yvy Pyte

302

territory, which is considered sacred territory
of the Pai Tavyterã Indigenous People.
Indigenous community leaders had
denounced illegal logging and death threats
in January.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Discrimination and profuse advocacy of
hatred against LGBTI people persisted with
impunity. The judiciary rejected five lawsuits
filed by transgender people demanding legal
recognition of their names in accordance with
their gender identity. In September, an
appeals court overturned the first decision
recognizing the change of identity of Mariana
Sepúlveda, a transgender woman who sued
for such recognition in 2016.
The criminal investigation into the physical
aggression suffered in 2019 by LGBTI people
during a march in the city of Hernandarias
continued without progress. The Supreme
Court had not resolved an action of
unconstitutionality filed by Amnesty
International and the organization Diversxs
Alto Paraná in 2019 against the prohibition of
the march.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
Children’s rights continued to be violated.
The Ministry of Public Health and Social
Welfare registered 8,900 births by adolescent
girls aged between 15 and 19 years, of which
593 were Indigenous, and 326 births by
younger girls aged 10-14 years, of which 85
were Indigenous.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
The Ministry of Women registered 45
femicides and 42 attempted femicides in
2023. In some cases, the victims had
previously reported their aggressors and
judicial protection measures were in place.
Congress discussed a draft law to eliminate
the adoption of a gender perspective in
public policies, including education.1
In September, the Senate approved a bill
that declared a social emergency in the face
of violence against women, children and
adolescents. The bill established a series of
measures for education, institutional

The State of the World’s Human Rights

communication and the training of public
servants, aimed at promoting change in the
sociocultural patterns that sustain gender
inequality. The measures will remain in force
for five years, but the bill did not include
budget allocations to finance them.

Authorities weakened institutions such as the
Public Prosecutor´s Office, the Constitutional
Court, the Ombudsperson’s Office and the
National Board of Justice, posing threats to
human rights.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT

Protests that began in December 2022 in
response to a change of government
continued during January and February.
Authorities responded with lethal force and
excessive use of less-lethal force. The
crackdown resulted in 50 deaths (49 civilians
and one police officer), with hundreds of
people injured. Security forces’ use of
unlawful force had a racist bias, particularly
targeting Indigenous Peoples. Security forces
carried out at least 20 possible extrajudicial
executions.1
In July, protests resumed during national
celebrations for Independence Day. Security
forces used tear gas and rubber pellets
disproportionately, carried out possible
arbitrary arrests, and harassed journalists.
In November, amid investigations that led to
her dismissal from office, the Attorney
General presented a constitutional complaint
against President Dina Boluarte and four
former ministers for the deaths of five people
in Ayacucho, Cusco, the capital, Lima and
Puno, and of injuries to one man in Lima
during protests in December and January.2
The criminal investigation resumed against
police officers regarding the deaths of two
young men and dozens of injured people who
protested on 14 November 2020 in relation
to the presidency of Manuel Merino.
The Police Protection Law, which eliminated
the principle of proportionality in the use of
force, remained active in contravention of
international standards.

A UN Special Rapporteur noted that peasant
communities and Indigenous Peoples faced
an alarming level of exposure to toxic
substances due to the uncontrolled use of
agrochemicals and identified significant
barriers in the access to environmental
justice.
1. “Paraguay: Senate must reject bill that prohibits education with a
gender perspective”, 20 September

PERU
Republic of Peru
Security forces responded to protests with
excessive use of force, especially in regions
with largely Indigenous populations.
Reparations for the La Pampilla refinery oil
spill had still not happened. Human rights
defenders remained at significant risk, and
impunity for killings prevailed. Sexual and
gender-based violence remained prevalent,
including against children and adolescents.
Authorities obstructed the right to abortion
in cases of child pregnancy. New legislation
undermined gender equality. LGTBI people
continued to face violence and
discriminatory legislation. Authorities
denied Venezuelans the protection they
were due. Victims of forced sterilization had
still not been granted reparation.
Authorities released former president
Alberto Fujimori from prison, disregarding a
ruling of the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights and undermining justice for
victims.

BACKGROUND
The political and social crisis that began in
December 2022 continued into 2023.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Two years after the oil spill from the La
Pampilla refinery in Ventanilla district, Callao
province, fishermen in the vicinity claimed
that formal registration of people affected by
the spill was still incomplete. Affected people
continued to report that they had not been
provided with effective remedies.

303

Furthermore, the necessary remediation and
clean-up had not been carried out.
People affected by environmental
contamination in Espinar, Cusco and other
regions had still not received specialized
health services, despite a court ruling in
2020 obliging the health system to provide
such services in Espinar province, and
implement a cross-sector intervention plan
with an allocated budget in several regions.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The killings of four human rights defenders
were reported: land defender Cristino
Melchor Flores in Piura region; Santiago
Contoricón, an Indigenous Asháninka human
rights leader in Junín region; Quinto Inuma,
an Indigenous Kichwa leader in San Martin
region who was granted protection measures
in 2021; and Benjamín Flores from the
Kakataibo Indigenous community. Impunity
persisted for most killings of defenders,
including for the murder of environmental
defender Roberto Pacheco in 2020 in Madre
de Dios region.
The Ministry of the Interior continued to lack
a protocol for the protection of human rights
defenders as part of the Protection
Mechanism for Human Rights Defenders.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
In 2023, the Ministry of Women and
Vulnerable Populations registered 142,182
cases of violence against women, girls and
adolescents, a 7% increase on 2022. Of
these, 28,991 were cases of sexual violence,
of which 50% were against female
adolescents aged between 12 and 17 years.
Over the same period, the ministry registered
11,944 cases of rape – of which 7,757 (66%)
were against children and adolescents – but
only 2,922 rape kits were delivered. Also over
the same period, 170 femicides were
registered (an increase of 16% compared
with the same period in 2022), and 258
attempted femicides.
According to the Ministry of Interior, 10,817
women and girls were reported missing,
representing 59% of all missing persons.
Only 50% of these women and girls had been

304

found; despite this, a specialized search
system with a gender focus had not been
implemented.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In June, the UN Committee on the Rights of
the Child ruled that Peru had failed to fulfil its
obligations to protect Camila, a 13-year-old
Indigenous girl who had been denied an
abortion. The ruling binds the Peruvian state
to provide abortions in all cases of child
pregnancy. Various organizations denounced
at least five cases of pregnant girls aged
under 15 years who had been denied
abortions in Loreto, Cajamarca and Cusco
regions. According to the Ministry of Health,
in 2023, there were 1,354 births by girls and
adolescents aged under 15 years, including
four girls aged under 11 years.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
LGBTI organizations reported that in 2023
there were at least eight murders of
transgender women, which could be
considered hate crimes. Despite this, there
was still no official registry of hate crimes.
There still lacked an accessible and
transparent administrative process to allow
transgender people to obtain an identity
document without resorting to judicial
processes. Marriage and children of samesex couples were still not legally recognized.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
More than 1.5 million Venezuelans in need of
protection living in Peru faced obstacles to
seeking asylum. As of July, 98% of asylum
applications remained pending. Visas that
were available failed to comply with basic
conditions, such as protection from forcible
return or access to health services.3
Thousands of Venezuelans were denied the
right to work because officials did not
recognize their status and corresponding
rights. Venezuelan women were especially at
risk, and many who had suffered genderbased violence did not attend protection
facilities due to fear, mistrust or
misinformation.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Stigmatization and xenophobic discourse
against Venezuelans were promoted by the
authorities and media.
On 10 November – the official deadline for
foreign nationals to regularize their migratory
status – authorities announced that they
would expel everyone lacking a regular
migratory status, leaving thousands
unprotected, both within and outside the
country.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
After 31 years, the remains of Dora Oyague,
Marcelino Rosales, Bertila Lozano, Felipe
Flores Chipana and Armando Amaro Condor,
among 10 people from La Cantuta university
who were forcibly disappeared, tortured and
killed in 1992, were returned to their families.
For the first time, the Inter-American Court
of Human Rights reviewed a case regarding
the forced sterilization policy of the 1990s –
that of Celia Ramos. In November, the
Supreme Court upheld a 2022 ruling
ordering reparations to the victims. In
December, however, the Criminal Chamber of
the Supreme Court annulled the opening of
the judicial investigation against former
president Alberto Fujimori and other
authorities for this policy.
In December, the Constitutional Court
ordered the release of Alberto Fujimori,
contravening the rights of victims of grave
human rights violations for which the former
president had been found responsible and
disregarding the orders of the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights prohibiting his
release.
Twenty years after the final report of the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission in
2003, many of the recommendations had not
been complied with, and 19,000 people
remained forcibly disappeared as a result of
the internal armed conflict.
1. Peru: Lethal Racism: Extrajudicial Executions and Unlawful Use of
Force by Peru’s Security Forces, 25 May
2. “Peru: Investigations against president and security forces must not
put justice for victims at risk”, 6 December

The State of the World’s Human Rights

3. Americas: Regularization and Protection: International Obligations for
the Protection of Venezuelan Nationals, 21 September

PHILIPPINES
Republic of the Philippines
Extrajudicial executions including under the
“war on drugs” continued. The ICC rejected
the government’s appeal to stop the
resumption of its investigation into
violations in the context of the “war on
drugs”. The practice of “red-tagging”
human rights defenders and others
persisted, and counterterrorism legislation
was increasingly used against humanitarian
workers. Freedom of expression continued
to be restricted. Enforced disappearances of
environmental activists and Indigenous
persons were reported.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
Extrajudicial executions in the context of the
“war on drugs” that started in 2016
continued into the second year of President
Ferdinand Marcos Jr.’s administration,
despite his public pronouncements that the
campaign against illicit drugs would focus on
treatment, rehabilitation and reintegration.
According to media monitoring by the
university-based research group Dahas, at
least 329 people were killed in 2023 by state
agents during police-led anti-drug operations
or by unknown individuals.
Other unlawful killings took place including
the killing by police of two teenage boys,
John Francis Ompad and Jemboy Baltazar, in
separate incidents in August in Rodriguez
town, Rizal province, and Navotas City. Eight
suspects, including seven police officers,
were charged with their killings. In
September in Bangued City, unknown
assailants shot dead Saniata Liwliwa
Gonzales Alzate, a lawyer who provided free
legal services to low-income litigants.
Investigations into the killing of Alzate were
ongoing at year’s end.

305

IMPUNITY
Impunity prevailed in most of the many
thousands of documented cases of unlawful
killings.
In August, government prosecutors affirmed
the Department of Justice’s dismissal of a
complaint against 17 police officers brought
by the wife of labour activist Emmanuel
Asuncion. He and eight other activists were
killed during police operations in Luzon on 7
March 2021.1 A petition to review the
dismissal remained pending at year’s end.
In June, a court sentenced three men to
between two and eight years’ imprisonment
as accessories in the killing of high-profile
radio broadcaster Percival Mabasa (known as
Percy Lapid) in October 2022.2 The murder
followed his on-air criticism of government
officials, including the former director of the
Bureau of Corrections, Gerald Bantag, who,
despite being charged with Percy Lapid’s
death, had not been arrested by year’s end.
In a rare break from the trend and in only
the second known conviction of a police
officer for drug-related killings, former police
officer Jefrey Perez was sentenced to up to
40 years’ imprisonment in March for killing
teenagers Carl Arnaiz and Reynaldo de
Guzman in 2017.
In July, the ICC Appeals Chamber rejected
the government’s appeal against the
resumption of the ICC prosecutor’s
investigations into crimes against humanity,
including in the context of the “war on
drugs”.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
Despite pressure from the UN Human Rights
Council to end the practice, “redtagging” (whereby organizations and
individuals are publicly linked to banned
communist groups) continued through the
year. “Red-tagging” made individuals
vulnerable to unlawful killing and other
serious human rights violations.3
On 13 March, the government’s National
Task Force to End Local Communist Armed
Conflict “red-tagged” human rights groups
including Karapatan and the Philippine
Alliance of Human Rights advocates, as well

306

as other legal assistance groups supporting a
proposed Human Rights Defenders
Protection Law.
In September, the Department of Education
publicly stated that 16 public high schools in
Metro Manila were involved in recruitment
activities for the Communist Party of the
Philippines and its armed wing, the New
People’s Army (NPA).4
The authorities increasingly used
counterterrorism legislation against “redtagged” groups, including humanitarian
organizations. In March, in the first conviction
under the Terrorism Financing Prevention
and Suppression Act since it was enacted in
2012, a court found a former cashier of
Catholic group Rural Missionaries of the
Philippines guilty of being an accessory to
terrorist financing. Four nuns and 11 other
members of the group, whom prosecutors
accused of being a conduit for the NPA,
faced similar charges. In May, the military
filed a complaint against humanitarian group
Community Empowerment Resource Network
for “financing terrorism” under the same law.
In May, a court in Muntinlupa City acquitted
prisoner of conscience and former senator
Leila de Lima for conspiring to trade in illicit
drugs. In November, she was released on bail
while the last of the politically-motivated
drug-related cases against her continued.5

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In January and September, the Court of Tax
Appeals acquitted prominent journalist and
Nobel laureate Maria Ressa and the holding
company of her news website Rappler of all
five tax evasion charges against them.6 In
December, the Department of Justice
dropped a charge alleging that she had
violated the law against foreign ownership of
media organizations. Appeals against the
verdict in a separate cyber-libel case, in
which Maria Ressa was sentenced to seven
years’ imprisonment, and an order to close
Rappler remained pending.
In December, a government prosecutor
dismissed a complaint alleging violations of
environmental laws filed by the police against
artist Max Santiago and three others involved

The State of the World’s Human Rights

in burning an effigy of the president during a
protest in July. Charges against 14 other
individuals for organizing the protest without
a permit remained pending.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
On 5 September, two environmental
protection workers, Jhed Tamano and Jonila
Castro, disappeared near the capital, Manila.
Before releasing them, the military presented
the women at a press conference on 19
September, saying that they were being held
in a “safe house” after they had sought help
from the authorities. However, the women
publicly accused the military of abducting
them and filed a petition with the Supreme
Court requesting protection from the police
and other government agencies. The military
subsequently filed perjury charges against
them, which remained pending at the end of
the year.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
On 28 April, “red-tagged” Indigenous
Peoples’ rights defenders Dexter Capuyan
and Gene Roz Jamil de Jesus disappeared in
Taytay, Rizal province, after reportedly being
forcibly taken by individuals who said they
worked for a police agency. In September, the
Court of Appeals dismissed a petition filed by
their families to compel the authorities to
produce Capuyan and de Jesus in court. The
Philippine National Police denied any
involvement in the case.7
In July, the state Anti-Terrorism Council
designated four leaders of an Indigenous
Peoples’ rights group, the Cordillera Peoples
Alliance, as terrorists, enabling the
government to investigate their activities and
freeze their financial assets.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In May, the House of Representatives’
Committee on Women and Gender Equality
approved a bill to protect people from
discrimination based on their sexual
orientation, gender identity and expression,
and sex characteristics. The bill would still
need to be approved by both the House of
Representatives and the Senate, but in

The State of the World’s Human Rights

September the senate majority leader said
this was not a priority.
On 7 October, drag performer Pura Luka
Vega was released on bail from police
custody after being arrested for breaching a
law against “indecent or immoral acts” that
“offend any race or religion”. Pura Luka Vega
had been arrested three days earlier for
reciting the Lord’s Prayer dressed in a
costume resembling Jesus. If convicted, they
face a substantial fine and/or up to 12 years’
imprisonment.
1. “Philippines: Ensure justice for ‘Bloody Sunday’ killings and other
attacks against activists”, 25 January
2. “Philippines: Ensure thorough, independent and impartial
investigation into journalist’s killing”, 1 February
3. “Philippines: Oral Statement: Item 6 – Consideration of UPR reports”,
27 March
4. “Philippines: Amnesty encourages VP Sara to lead DepEd into a
rights-based and learner-centered path”, 6 September
5. Granting Leila de Lima bail must lead to dismissal of last bogus
charge against her, 13 November.
6. “Philippines: Nobel laureate Maria Ressa acquitted on politicallymotivated tax evasion charges”, 18 January
7. “Philippines: Indigenous rights activists reported missing: Dexter
Capuyan and Gene Roz Jamil “Bazoo” de Jesus”, 16 May

POLAND
Republic of Poland
Poland continued to rely on fossil fuels and
challenged new EU legislation combating
climate change before the Court of Justice
of the EU. A Senate commission found that
use of the Pegasus spyware had rendered
the 2019 parliamentary election unfair.
Parliament debated controversial legislation
which would prohibit NGOs from providing
anti-discrimination education in schools.
Access to abortion remained limited. An
amendment to the law on domestic violence
expanded the offence to cover both cyber
and economic violence. Border guards
continued to violate the rights of refugees
and migrants reaching the country via the
Belarusian border. The government
continued to target judges and prosecutors

307

who raised concerns over reforms to the
judiciary.

BACKGROUND
Opposition parties won a majority of seats in
parliamentary elections in October. The new
government announced a number of
measures aimed at restoring the rule of law
and criminalization of hate crimes.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In July 2022 thousands of fish and other
wildlife died after an environmental disaster
in the River Oder. By year’s end the
government had still not taken effective
action to restore the river’s ecosystem despite
ongoing pollution and risks to marine life,
health and livelihoods.
Poland continued to rely on fossil fuels
including coal and in July challenged the
EU’s recently adopted climate legislation,
including a 2035 ban on new combustion
engine cars, in the Court of Justice of the EU.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
On 6 September, the Senate’s Extraordinary
Commission for clarification of illegal
surveillance reported that the use of Pegasus
spyware against opposition figures and
government critics was unlawful, and
rendered the 2019 parliamentary elections
unfair.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
In August parliament continued debating an
amendment to the Law on the Education
System, the so-called Lex Czarnek 3.0. The
latest iteration, a citizens’ proposal, aimed to
prohibit NGOs from supporting schools by
providing anti-discrimination and sex
education not covered by the school
curriculum. The change in the law ultimately
did not happen.
Concerns remained about access to
education for Ukrainian refugee children,
given language challenges, among other
issues. An estimated 200,000 Ukrainian
school children remained outside any
educational system.

308

RIGHT TO SOCIAL SECURITY
In July parliament adopted a law which will
increase the amount of child benefit paid
under the so-called Family 500+ programme
to PLN 800 (EUR 184).
However, Poland had still not accepted any
of the UN mechanisms allowing complaints
of alleged violations of social, economic and
cultural rights to be lodged at the
international level.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Access to abortion remained limited, with
pregnant people at risk as hospitals did not
provide abortions even in life-threatening
situations. At least one woman was said to
have died as a consequence of being denied
abortion services in May.
In March activist Justyna Wydrzyńska was
convicted under draconian and
discriminatory laws for providing information
to and supporting a pregnant woman
experiencing domestic violence who needed
a safe abortion. She was sentenced to eight
months of community service. The verdict
was not final pending an appeal by her
lawyers.
Police continued to harass women
suspected of having had an abortion. In April
a woman from Kraków was strip searched
and her electronic devices were confiscated
by police officers after she told a doctor
whom she had consulted on another matter
that she had had an abortion the previous
week.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
An amendment to the law on domestic
violence entered into force in June. It
contained a new definition of the offence to
include both cyber and economic violence
and broadened the range of potential
perpetrators to include ex-partners. The
definition of rape in criminal law continued to
fall short of that in the Council of Europe
Convention on preventing and
combating violence against women and
domestic violence (Istanbul Convention).

The State of the World’s Human Rights

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In December the newly appointed minister of
culture and national heritage unilaterally
dismissed the boards of several public
broadcasters. Although public media needed
urgent reform, the form of the intervention
violated human rights standards with regard
to freedom of expression.

DISCRIMINATION
In December an MP used a fire extinguisher
to put out a menorah that had been lit in
parliament for the Jewish festival of
Hannukah. Although he was suspended from
his party, and parliament lifted his immunity,
his action met with approval from a section of
society.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Refugees and migrants reaching the country
via the Belarusian border continued to face
official hostility. Border guards violently
forced people back to the border, denying
them international protection. Some people
who were forced back by Polish border
guards were subsequently also mistreated by
Belarusian guards and sent back
into Białowieża Forest. From the beginning of
the crisis in 2021 until the end of 2023 at
least 55 migrants and asylum seekers were
reported to have died due to lack of medical
care, malnutrition and exhaustion.1
Thousands of refugees and migrants,
including children, who had managed to
cross into Poland from Belarus continued to
be arbitrarily detained in closed centres for
foreigners. Automatic detention with no
individual determination led to many court
rulings awarding compensation for unlawful
detention.
Many Ukrainian refugees were still living in
group housing centres, despite their
temporary nature, and faced challenges
finding rental accommodation. Most refugees
were required to pay up to 75% of the cost of
group accommodation. While this obligation
was supposed to exclude certain groups of
people, it still applied to the majority of
people who were currently in those centres,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

which caused some refugees to return to
Ukraine.
A referendum in October asked suggestive
and misleading questions, including one
which implied that the refugees were
“illegal”. The referendum was preceded by a
notable increase in anti-immigrant rhetoric by
politicians and pro-governmental media. In
protest many voters refused to participate,
and a final turnout of under 50% meant the
results were void.

UNFAIR TRIALS
The government continued to target judges
and prosecutors who raised concerns over
reforms to the judiciary. In January
parliament granted the Supreme
Administrative Court jurisdiction over
disciplinary cases regarding judges, despite
this contravening the Polish Constitution. It
did not resolve issues concerning the
independence of judges, who could still be
dismissed if they questioned the legality and
the decisions of the National Council of the
Judiciary (KRS), established to participate in
their appointment. The KRS was restructured
in order to grant the executive more control
over the judiciary and to exercise political
control over judicial appointments.
In July, the European Court of Human
Rights ruled in Tuleya v Poland that the
Disciplinary Chamber of the Supreme Court,
which had lifted Judge Igor Tuleya’s immunity
from prosecution and suspended him from
judicial duties, was not an independent and
impartial court. The measures taken against
the judge were found to have violated his
rights to a fair trial, to a private life and to
freedom of expression.
In July parliament passed an amendment to
the Defence of the Homeland Act that
prevented a single judge, Piotr Raczkowski,
from continuing to serve as a judge. The
amendment stipulated that any military judge
released from military service must also retire
as a judge. At the time of the amendment,
Piotr Raczkowski was the only judge who fell
into that category. He was well-known for
criticizing the government in power at that

309

time, which had already tried to remove him
from office by different means.
A law on investigating Russian influence on
internal security – the so-called Lex Tusk –
was adopted in April, despite widespread
concerns about its negative implications for
human rights. These included fears that the
law may be used to target and stigmatize
opposition politicians, dissidents and others
who may be running for political office or who
may be critical of the government.2
1. Poland: Amicus Curiae Brief on the Ruling on Providing Assistance at
the Polish-Belarusian border, 15 December (Polish only)
2. “Poland: Law establishing special commission threatens human
rights”, 28 June

PORTUGAL
Republic of Portugal
Seven police officers accused of torturing
migrants received permission to resume
their duties. Concerns about low
prosecution rates for domestic violence
persisted. The number of families without
adequate housing was triple that in 2018.
Six young people brought a landmark court
case against 33 countries for inaction
against climate change.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In December, following a visit in 2022, the
Council of Europe's Committee for the
Prevention of Torture reported that illtreatment of detainees by police officers is a
persistent practice. The report reiterated
Portuguese authorities’ obligation to ensure
effective investigations into these allegations,
and the application of fundamental
safeguards to address impunity within the
police.
In June, Évora’s court of appeal acquitted
one military police officer and reduced the
sentences of four other officers convicted of
torturing migrants in the city of Odemira, Beja
region. After an initial suspension from their
roles, all seven police officers involved in the

310

case received permission to resume their
duties.
According to a report by the Ombudswoman
published in April, the average occupancy
rate of prisons in December 2022 was
100.8%, with 25 out of 49 prisons
overcrowded.

DISCRIMINATION
GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
In March, the UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR)
expressed concern at the “persistent high
level of domestic violence” in Portugal. The
committee urged the authorities to address
low prosecution rates for suspected
perpetrators of domestic violence, as well as
insufficient provision of shelters for victims
seeking safety.

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In March, the governmental annual report on
internal security estimated an increase of
18.2% in the number of people subjected to
human trafficking, almost half for labour
exploitation. In February, an adult and a child
died, and 14 other people were seriously
injured, in a fire in an overcrowded house in
the Mouraria neighbourhood of the
capital, Lisbon; all were migrants.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In February – two years after it emerged that,
for over a decade, Lisbon City Council had
been passing to foreign embassy officials the
personal details of protesters demonstrating
in front of embassies – three activists sued
the municipality of Lisbon for alleged
breaches of their rights. The case was
brought one year after the National Data
Protection Commission fined Lisbon City
Council EUR 1,200,000 for 255 breaches of
data law.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
In October, the government admitted there
were 86,000 families with housing needs,
triple the number in 2018. Data from the
National Statistics Institute in January
estimated that 9.2% of people lived in

The State of the World’s Human Rights

overcrowded housing, affecting nearly 20%
of families who were at risk of poverty. In
March, the CESCR expressed concern about
persistent housing shortages and a lack of
data on access to adequate housing for
marginalized groups.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In January, the UN Special Rapporteur on
human rights and the environment urged the
government to “improve access to
environmental information, strengthen public
participation and facilitate access to justice”.
In September, the European Court of
Human Rights began hearing a case brought
by six young people from Portugal against 33
countries, including their own. Citing
problems of extreme heat and wildfires, they
argued that governments were breaching
their human rights by failing to do enough to
cut greenhouse gas emissions and protect
them from climate change.

PUERTO RICO
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico
The government often used excessive force
against protesters. Access to abortion was
at risk due to legislative bills introduced
during the year. LGBTI people continued to
face discrimination and had diminished
access to housing. Femicides continued to
occur with impunity. Discrimination against
Afro-descendants persisted. Higher food
and electricity prices put people’s rights at
risk.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
The government continued to intimidate
protesters and to use excessive force during
demonstrations. Violence committed by
police officers often went unpunished. At
least 17 people protesting displacement and
environmental destruction were arrested
during demonstrations.
On 29 January, police arrested five women
and one man during a protest to demand

The State of the World’s Human Rights

compliance with a court order to demolish an
illegal construction in a coastal area in the
municipality of Aguadilla. In July, five
protesters were charged for “obstructing the
actions of a public authority”.
On 4 March, police arrested three
environmental activists during protests
demanding the demolition and removal of
debris, already ordered by a court, from an
illegal construction site neighbouring a beach
in Rincón municipality. The construction
project had been the subject of protests since
2021 because of its infringement on public
property.
On 6 July, residents of the Island
Municipality of Vieques protested against the
auction of public land, claiming that it
exacerbated the problem of displacement
due to high real estate prices. The
community organization Colmena Cimarrona
stated that the police had physically
assaulted some women demonstrators.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
There were several attempts to pass laws to
restrict abortion, following the US Supreme
Court’s decision in 2022 to end constitutional
recognition of the right to abortion. In March,
House Bill 1644, which was ultimately
withdrawn, sought to punish women who
have an abortion in Puerto Rico with 25
years’ imprisonment. The Senate continued
debating Bill 495, introduced in 2021, which
would require prior authorization of at least
one parent or legal guardian before a person
under 18 years of age could access an
abortion.
In May, members of the Legislative
Assembly requested government intervention
regarding four abortion clinics that had
allegedly failed to notify the authorities of
procedures performed on persons under 15
years of age. Targeted regulations such as
these could be used to discredit clinics and
hinder access to abortion.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The transgender community continued to
face discrimination. In June, the House of
Representatives rejected Bill 764, which

311

sought to limit the participation of
transgender athletes in the gender category
with which they identify.
Also in June, members of the legislature
tried to censor a children’s reading activity
because of the participation of people in drag
and transgender persons. The activity took
place after a change of venue. In August,
House of Representatives Bill 1821 was
introduced to criminalize artistic activities or
those aimed at children’s or family
entertainment that are performed in drag.
The Senate approved Bill 427, which aimed
to establish a public policy to prevent
discrimination against older LGBTI people
accessing housing and those living in care
homes. An investigation by the Centre for
Investigative Journalism and news outlet El
Nuevo Día highlighted the discrimination
against this group in long-term care centres
due to a lack of appropriate training and
procedures for dignified treatment.
According to the most recent census in
2020, Puerto Rico was the US jurisdiction
with the lowest percentage of LGBTI people
(0.5%) or same-sex couples (0.2%) who
reported owning a home.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
According to the Gender Equality Observatory
of Puerto Rico NGO, at least 72 femicides
and suspected femicides were recorded in
2023. In April, the Puerto Rico Institute of
Statistics added a section on femicides to its
statistical platform and 19 femicides had
been recorded by the end of the year.
In June, the House of Representatives
approved Bill 1583, which recognized nonlethal strangulation, suffocation, and
positional asphyxia of women without lethal
intent as forms of gender-based aggravated
mistreatment. Such actions were previously
criminalized through criminal offences
without a gender perspective. At the end of
the year, the bill was still pending before the
Senate.
In May, the Committee on Women’s Affairs
of the House of Representatives concluded
an investigation which found that the Police
Bureau had failed to properly investigate

312

domestic violence cases involving police
officers.
Women and girls continued to be at risk of
human trafficking, a crime seldom punished
on the island. The government and
legislature continued to debate Senate Bill
1237, introduced in June, which proposed
the creation of a human trafficking
observatory and a strategic plan to combat
this crime.

DISCRIMINATION
Racial discrimination continued to be a
concern, and anti-Black racism continued to
manifest routinely and be normalized. A
2021 law that provided for the collection of
statistics on racism and mandated an
education campaign to promote anti-racist
awareness and recognition of African descent
in Puerto Rico had not been fully
implemented.
Racist violence escalated and the
authorities failed to conduct prompt,
independent, impartial and effective
investigation of possible discriminatory
motives. In August, a court found a man not
guilty on charges of disturbing the peace in a
case of alleged racist violence. The case
involved a dispute between neighbours in
which one party had allegedly racially
discriminated against and harassed the other
party since at least 2019.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
The economic situation and the cost of living
impacted on people’s enjoyment of their
rights. Inflation on food items was 5.1% as of
October, according to the Puerto Rico
Consumer Price Index.
In June, the US Census Bureau released
community resilience estimates for Puerto
Rico, using 2019 data. This indicated that
46.1% of Puerto Rico’s population had three
or more risk factors, such as poverty,
disability, employment and age, and would
therefore be less resilient to withstand and
recover from a disaster.
In February, a new consumer charging
model was announced (with a flat rate and a

The State of the World’s Human Rights

consumption-based tariff) designed to help
pay off the Puerto Rico Electric Power
Authority’s debt to public and private
creditors. The new model caused an increase
in the cost of electricity, leading to a number
of protests. The island suffered several
blackouts during the year.

QATAR
State of Qatar
Authorities continued to restrict the right to
freedom of expression and silence critical
voices. Migrant workers continued to face a
range of abuses, including wage theft,
forced labour and exploitation, and had
inadequate access to grievance and redress
mechanisms. Women continued to face
discrimination in law and practice.
Discriminatory laws put LGBTI people at
risk of detention.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities continued to curtail the rights
to freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly, including by arbitrarily detaining
individuals for exercising their human rights.
In 2023, activists received reliable reports
confirming that in mid-2022 the Criminal
Court of Appeal in the capital, Doha upheld
the convictions against brothers Hazza and
Rashed al-Marri, both of them lawyers, for
offences that included contesting laws ratified
by the emir, “threatening” the emir on social
media, compromising the independence of
the state, organizing unauthorized public
meetings, and “violating” social values
online. They had been sentenced to life
imprisonment. The charges related to
speeches they made or poetry published
online critical of the country’s electoral law
that discriminates against members of alMarri tribe.
Two activists imprisoned for online posts
were released after serving their sentences.
One of them, Abdullah al-Mohannadi, was
released in August after completing an eightmonth sentence imposed for posts and

The State of the World’s Human Rights

activism relating to the National Campaign for
Travel-Banned Citizens. However, he
remained subject to a travel ban.

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Migrant workers continued to face serious
abuses, including wage theft, restrictions on
changing jobs and inadequate grievance and
redress mechanisms.
In early January, hundreds of marshals and
security guards contracted to Qatar-based
Teyseer Security Services, who had worked
excessive hours without rest days on FIFA
World Cup 2022 sites, staged protests days
before their contracts expired to demand they
be paid their dues in full.1 They told Amnesty
International that representatives of Teyseer
and the government promised they would be
compensated, a pledge that was not
honoured.
Qatar’s monthly minimum wage continued
to be too low for workers to have an adequate
standard of living or free themselves from
debt bondage caused by paying illegal
recruitment fees, according to the ILO.
The authorities appeared to implement
Qatar’s heat stress legislation for outdoor
workers in the construction sector, but not in
the security sector.
Migrant workers continued to face
bureaucratic hurdles when seeking to change
jobs without the permission of their
employers, even though such permission was
no longer a legal requirement.
Live-in domestic workers, most of whom are
women, continued to face particularly harsh
working conditions and abuses as a result of
the government’s ongoing failure to
implement measures introduced in 2017 to
protect them.
Migrant workers remained banned from
joining and forming trade unions, a right
afforded to Qatari nationals.
RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND REPARATION
Migrant workers continued to face barriers in
accessing justice and receiving remedy for a
range of abuses, including historic ones. The
problems included: delays in the legal
process for up to a year; language barriers;
non-payment of dues when cases were won;

313

the exclusion of some abuses such as the
payment of illegal recruitment fees; and the
inability of workers to access justice remotely
once they leave the country.
The authorities did not disclose the 2023
figure for the state-run compensation fund for
workers, but told Amnesty International that
the fund had “increased its payments”
without providing any information to support
the claim. The fund caps compensation at
USD 5,500 per worker, preventing some
workers from receiving their full wages.2
The authorities continued to fail to
investigate effectively the deaths of migrant
workers and to hold employers or authorities
accountable, precluding any assessment of
whether the deaths were work-related and
depriving families of the opportunity to
receive compensation. Qatar and FIFA,
football’s world governing body, failed to
ensure long-overdue remedy, including
compensation for the vast numbers of
workers whose rights were abused for a
decade while working on projects related to
football’s 2022 World Cup.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women continued to face discrimination in
law and practice. Under the guardianship
system, women need the permission of a
male guardian – usually their husband,
father, brother, grandfather or uncle – to
marry, study abroad on government
scholarships, work in many government jobs,
travel abroad if aged under 25, and access
reproductive healthcare.
While family law provides that the husband
should “refrain from hurting [his wife]
physically or morally”, women remained
inadequately protected in law against
domestic violence.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Qatari laws discriminate against LGBTI
people, and authorities continued to detain
individuals solely for their sexual orientation
or gender expression.
The penal code criminalizes a range of
same-sex consensual sexual acts between
adults. Article 296(3) punishes with

314

imprisonment anyone who “leads or induces
or tempts a male, by any means, into
committing an act of sodomy or debauchery.”
Article 296(4) punishes with imprisonment
anyone who “induces or tempts a male or
female, by any means, into committing acts
contrary to morals or that are unlawful.”
In an interview broadcast in September, the
prime minister stated that, “This [referring to
a question on LGBTI rights] is something not
acceptable in our faith… as long as they are
respecting the law in public areas, no one’s
safety is in question.”

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Qatar continued to be one of the world’s top
five CO2 emitters per capita. It also expanded
its production of liquefied natural gas, and in
June, signed a 27-year supply agreement
with China and European oil companies.
1. “Qatar: Hundreds of migrant workers employed as security guards at
FIFA World Cup denied justice for abuses”, 15 June
2. A Legacy in Jeopardy: Continuing Abuses of Migrant Workers in Qatar
One Year After the World Cup, 16 November

ROMANIA
Romania
Roma continued to face systemic
segregation and discrimination. Same-sex
marriage and partnership remained
unrecognized. New legislation risked
restricting freedom of peaceful assembly
and expression disproportionately. Reported
cases of domestic violence increased.
Romania failed to take adequate action to
decarbonize its economy.

BACKGROUND
Numerous protests took place in 2023
concerning, for example, young people’s right
to access inclusive education without
discrimination or censorship, attempts to
restrict the right to protest, women’s rights,
teachers’ low salaries, underfunding of
education, and the need to tackle the climate
emergency by phasing out fossil fuels. No

The State of the World’s Human Rights

major incidents were reported during the
protests.
Romania’s record on implementing
judgments by the European Court of Human
Rights (ECtHR) remained the poorest in the
EU, according to the European
Implementation Network and Democracy
Reporting International.

DISCRIMINATION
Police violence against Roma remained
prevalent and procedures to investigate it
were inadequate. In March, a court upheld a
complaint by two Roma men tortured by
police in 2021 in the city of Tulcea. In
August, the relatives of a young man who
died in police custody in the city of Arad filed
a criminal complaint against the Romanian
police with the support of NGOs. The case
remained pending at the end of the year.
In August, a pregnant, deaf Roma woman
was treated in a discriminatory and negligent
manner after being denied medical care at a
hospital in the town of Urziceni due to a lack
of appropriate facilities. As a result, she had
to give birth on the pavement outside. A
criminal complaint was filed against the
hospital and a petition alleging multiple
discrimination was submitted to the National
Council for Combating Discrimination
(CNCD). The Ministry of Health condemned
the incident and launched an investigation.
In August, the CNCD found that a school in
the county of Vâlcea had indirectly
discriminated against Roma pupils by
creating separate classes based on ethnicity
and residence criteria. As a result, the school
was fined and given a six-month deadline to
remedy the situation.
In September, the Council of Europe
criticized Romania’s failure to effectively
protect Roma from discrimination. It deplored
the prevalence of anti-Roma hate speech
from politicians. It also noted little tangible
progress in overcoming segregation in
education and housing or in reducing the gap
between Roma and the rest of the population
in access to healthcare, clean water and
sanitation.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In May, the ECtHR ruled in the case of
Buhuceanu and others v. Romania that
same-sex families needed some form of legal
recognition to enable them to access equal
rights.
Following the judgment, civil society
organizations urged the government to adopt
adequate instruments of protection and legal
recognition for all families, including LGBTIparent families. At the end of the year,
however, same-sex marriage and partnership
remained unrecognized.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
In May, parliament adopted a legislative
proposal increasing criminal penalties for
acts of “outrage” against public officials and
“disturbing of public order and peace”,
among other offences. These criminal
offences lacked legal clarity and
disproportionately restricted the rights to
freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly. Around 50 NGOs had raised
concerns in an open letter when the proposal
was introduced in February. The President
promulgated the law in July.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Law enforcement agencies registered an
increase in reported incidents of domestic
violence compared with 2022.
In February, an NGO national study found
that respondents increasingly disapproved of
violence against women compared with 20
years before. However, one in four accepted
that a woman could not go out without her
male partner and 23% that he could forbid
her choice of friends. Some 19% of
respondents found it “not at all or slightly
serious” if a woman was raped after agreeing
to visit a man’s house. Women did not report
violent incidents out of fear for themselves or
their children, a distrust of the authorities, a
lack of alternative accommodation options
and feelings of shame.

315

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT

BACKGROUND

According to a Eurostat report in January,
Romania continued to rely on fossil fuels,
including coal, for 72% of its energy supply.
In April, a consultation started on the
country’s Long-Term Strategy to achieve the
decarbonization of the economy by 2050.
NGOs criticized shortcomings in the
implementation of Romania’s commitments
to decarbonization. They also denounced
projects including deforestation to enable
mining works and offshore gas exploitation
around the Black Sea coast.

Russia committed numerous violations of
international humanitarian law in Ukraine
(see Ukraine entry), while its invasion largely
stalled. Ukrainian military attacks reached
deeper inside Russian territory, and Russian
authorities reported dozens of civilian
casualties. The government continued to
heavily control and manipulate information
on the war. Estimates of Russian military
casualties reached hundreds of thousands
killed and wounded. Dozens of arson attacks
on conscription centres and other
governmental buildings were reported across
the country. On 23-24 June, Evgeny
Prigozhin led the Wagner Group, a private
military company he had founded, in an
aborted military coup. He avoided
prosecution but was killed in a suspicious
plane crash on 25 August.
Russia continued to face international
isolation. In September, the newly appointed
UN Special Rapporteur on the situation on
human rights in the Russian Federation
reported on “the increasingly repressive
crackdown on the peaceful exercise of
human rights.” Authorities refused to
recognize the mandate or permit a country
visit. In November, Russia withdrew from the
Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in
Europe.
Despite its refusal to cooperate with UN
human rights mechanisms, Russia sought to
return to the Human Rights Council, but lost
the vote in October. Authorities continued to
ignore decisions of the European Court of
Human Rights regarding Russia’s violations
of the European Convention on Human
Rights committed while Russia was a state
party.

RUSSIA
Russian Federation
Russia continued its war of aggression
against Ukraine and allowed its forces to
commit war crimes with impunity.
Meanwhile, the human rights situation at
home continued to deteriorate. Freedoms of
expression, peaceful assembly and
association were further severely restricted.
Government critics faced arbitrary
prosecution, lengthy prison terms, violent
attacks committed with impunity, and other
reprisals. Authorities used extensive antiterrorism and anti-extremism legislation
against opposition and religious groups,
individual critics and lawyers. Torture and
other ill-treatment in detention were
widespread and largely went unpunished.
Trials were unfair, especially in political
cases and those involving Ukrainian
prisoners of war. New transphobic
legislation was adopted, and the so-called
“LGBT movement” was designated as
“extremist”. Russia refused to cooperate
with international human rights institutions
and, after the ICC issued an arrest warrant
for President Vladimir Putin, criminalized
assistance to it. Authorities failed to prevent
antisemitic and anti-refugee violence.
Measures to tackle the climate crisis were
insufficient and major environmental NGOs
were banned from the country.

316

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Any form of criticism of the authorities was
severely suppressed.1 Media outlets, social
media platforms and individuals faced heavy
fines, arbitrary blocking, prosecution and
other reprisals under an expanding set of
punitive legal rules. These included being
designated a “foreign agent” and allegations
of “extremism”, “justification of terrorism”,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

“dissemination of knowingly false
information”, “discreditation”, “incitement to
hatred” and LGBTI “propaganda”.
On 29 March, authorities arrested US
journalist Evan Gershkovich on questionable
espionage charges. His trial remained
pending at year’s end.
On 4 May, theatre director Evgenia
Berkovich and playwright Svetlana Petriychuk
were arrested on false charges of
“justification of terrorism” for their awardwinning play about women who married
members of armed groups in Syria. They
were still awaiting trial in detention at the end
of the year.
People expressing opposition to the invasion
of Ukraine, to Russia’s violations there or to
war in general faced particularly harsh
persecution.2 At least 140 individuals were
sentenced to prison for statements, protests
or other activities opposing the war,
compared with 22 in 2022.
Opposition and human rights activist
Vladimir Kara-Murza was sentenced in April
to 25 years’ imprisonment on false charges of
state treason, dissemination of “fake
information” about the armed forces and
participation in an “undesirable
organization”.
Aleksei Moskalyov, a businessman and
single father in Tula region, was arrested on
27 February on charges of “discrediting the
armed forces” for criticizing the war on
Ukraine on social media. Authorities placed
his 13-year-old daughter in an orphanage;
after a campaign on her behalf, they handed
her to other family members. Aleksei
Moskalyov’s sentence of two years’
imprisonment was overturned in December.
On 13 April, a court upheld the three-year
sentence on Vladimir Rumyantsev, a coal
stoker from the city of Vologda, for
“disseminating knowingly false information
about the Russian armed forces”. Vladimir
Rumyantsev had used a home radio studio to
rebroadcast banned media outlets with
information about the war.
Oleg Orlov, a well-known human rights
defender, was on trial for publishing an article
criticizing Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Many university professors and
schoolteachers were said to have lost their
jobs for criticizing the authorities or the
invasion of Ukraine. Svetlana DrugoveykoDolzhanskaya was dismissed from St
Petersburg State University on 11 October
after she testified as a linguistic expert in
support of prisoner of conscience Aleksandra
Skochilenko.
Some of those imprisoned faced additional,
new charges while already serving their
terms. For example, in October, prisoner of
conscience and former opposition municipal
councillor Aleksei Gorinov, who had been
sentenced to seven years’ imprisonment in
2022 for an anti-war speech at a council
meeting, was charged with “justification of
terrorism”.
In November, another prisoner of
conscience, journalist Maria Ponomarenko,
who had been sentenced to six years’
imprisonment for sharing a video about
Russia’s bombing of the drama theatre in
Mariupol, Ukraine, faced new dubious
charges for “causing bodily harm” to penal
colony personnel.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
Freedom of assembly remained suppressed.
Relevant unduly restrictive legislation used
vague language allowing for arbitrary
interpretation. Domestic laws prohibited
spontaneous assemblies and protests near
governmental buildings and in many other
places, and contained numerous other
restrictions on venues and organizers.
Authorities used their broad powers to deny
authorization, and the police showed zero
tolerance for “unauthorized” assemblies,
however small and infrequent.
In some parts of the country, peaceful rallies
remained prohibited under the pretext of
Covid-19 regulations. Restrictions were often
discriminatory; for example on 29 September,
Moscow city authorities banned a vigil to
commemorate victims of Soviet-era
repressions while allowing a large progovernment rally to proceed on the same day.

317

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Authorities continued to target civil society
organizations, including human rights
groups, using Russia’s extensive repressive
legislation. In 2023, 54 organizations and
172 individuals were labelled “foreign
agents” and 56 organizations were
designated “undesirable”.
Leading human rights groups, including the
Moscow Helsinki Group, Sakharov Centre
and Sova Centre, were officially dissolved on
the pretext of violations of “foreign agent”
regulations or technicalities.
Several politically motivated criminal cases
were initiated against members of Memorial,
the country’s oldest human rights
organization, which had been liquidated in
2022. They included charges of “discrediting
the armed forces” and “rehabilitation of
Nazism”. Memorial member Aleksandr
Chernyshov was arrested on 5 May and
accused of “smuggling items of cultural
value” for allegedly trying to take Memorial’s
archive out of the country. He remained
incarcerated at the end of the year.
Grigory Melkonyants, co-chair of Golos,
Russia’s leading election watchdog, was
arrested on 17 August for cooperating with
an international coalition of election monitors
deemed an “undesirable organization”. He
was placed in pretrial detention.
Charges of extremism were used against
groups and individuals critical of the
authorities. On 17 May, a court upheld the
arbitrary designation of youth pro-democracy
group Vesna as an “extremist” organization
and prohibited its activities. Six individuals
remained in detention at the end of the year
on accusations of participating in Vesna.
Prominent opposition figure Aleksei Navalny
and his associates faced further extremismrelated charges on account of their
involvement with NGOs he had founded. On
4 August, Aleksei Navalny, who had been
arbitrarily deprived of liberty since 2021,
received another politically motivated
sentence increasing his imprisonment to 19
years. His associates Lilia Chanysheva,
Ksenia Fadeeva, Daniel Kholodny and Vadim
Ostanin had been arrested, tried and

318

sentenced, or were serving prison terms at
the end of the year. Individuals who had
donated money, no matter how small the
amount, were also prosecuted, including
activist Gleb Kalinychev who was awaiting
trial in detention for allegedly donating about
USD 30 to Aleksei Navalny’s Anti-Corruption
Foundation.
In August, the criminal code was amended
to penalize “carrying out activities” of foreign
NGOs without registered offices in Russia. It
effectively criminalized any forms of
cooperation with most civil society groups
outside the country.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Authorities continued the unfounded
prosecution of Jehovah’s Witnesses since
their church was arbitrarily banned in 2017.
As of December, more than 100 believers
remained in detention.
Members of Muslim groups, including Hizb
ut-Tahrir, faced prosecution and unfair trials
on extremism and terrorism-related charges
for their religious views.

CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS’ RIGHTS
In a rare precedent, on 16 March, a court
allowed Pavel Mushumansky, a Christian
believer who had been enlisted to take part in
Russia’s war against Ukraine, to undergo
alternative civilian service. This option,
however, remained unattainable for nearly all
other conscientious objectors.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment in custody
remained widespread. Perpetrators enjoyed
impunity or received lenient sentences. Only
one case ended in conviction under the
article of the criminal code penalizing torture
that was introduced in 2022.
Authorities targeted specific prisoners such
as Aleksei Navalny with various forms of illtreatment, including denial of adequate
medical care, arbitrary placement in
punishment cells (often for multiple
consecutive terms), psychological pressure,
threats and use of physical force.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

On 14 June, anti-war activist Anatoly
Berezikov was found dead in a detention
centre in the city of Rostov-on-Don, where he
had been placed following dubious
administrative proceedings, a day before his
release. Shortly beforehand, he had told his
lawyer and a court that he feared for his life,
having been threatened by officers of the
Federal Security Service and tortured with
electric shocks. These allegations were
ignored by the authorities, and police
declared his death to be suicide. His lawyer,
and a human rights defender who was
helping Anatoly Berezikov, had to leave the
country after the police searched their
homes.

UNFAIR TRIALS
Criminal courts demonstrated a profound
bias against defendants. Only 0.4% of
defendants were acquitted or had their
prosecution terminated by courts. Judges
routinely and unquestioningly accepted the
prosecution’s evidence, including testimony
given under torture, and rejected strong
evidence of innocence. Trials, especially
involving charges related to terrorism,
extremism or high treason, were often closed
to the public.
Lawyers working on high profile political
cases, especially those involving terrorism or
extremism-related accusations, faced
pressure and harassment. On 13 October,
authorities arrested three of Aleksei Navalny’s
lawyers and accused them of “participation
in an extremist association” for their
professional activities. They awaited trial in
detention at year’s end.3
On 4 July, unidentified people severely
assaulted, humiliated and badly injured
journalist Elena Milashina and lawyer
Aleksandr Nemov on their way to a court
hearing in the republic of Chechnya. No
proper investigation into the attack was
conducted.
Authorities subjected Ukrainian prisoners of
war and civilians to unfair trials. On 22
August, a court in Moscow upheld a 13-year
prison sentence against Ukrainian prisoner of
war and human rights defender Maksym

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Butkevych for purported war crimes that he
could not have committed based on evidence
of his location at the time. He was likely
forced to “confess” to the crimes on camera.4
Unfair trials were also deployed against
activists and dissenters. On 12 September,
Dagestani journalist Abdulmumin Gadzhiev
was sentenced to 17 years’ imprisonment on
trumped-up terrorism-related charges. On
the same day, Zarema Musayeva, mother of
Chechen human rights defender Abubakar
Yangulbaev, was sentenced to five-and-a-half
years’ imprisonment on fabricated charges of
using violence against a police officer.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
On 24 July, President Putin signed into law
transphobic legislation that prohibited
gender-affirming treatment and legal gender
recognition for transgender people. The law
also annulled previously registered marriages
and prohibited adoption of children by
transgender people.
On 30 November, the Supreme Court
designated what it called “the international
public LGBT movement” as an “extremist
organization” and banned its activities.
Several LGBTI organizations and activists had
to stop their work or leave Russia in the wake
of the judgment. Within days, police raided
LGBTI-friendly clubs in various cities,
photographed patrons’ documents and
intimidated them.
Authorities issued dozens of fines to video
streaming services for hosting “LGBT
propaganda”. Many films and television
shows were subjected to censorship to
remove any references to same-sex
relationships.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
On 1 September, in a clear example of
indoctrination violating the right to quality
education, high school students across the
country and in occupied territories of Ukraine
were issued new “unified” history textbooks.
These sought to whitewash the historical
human rights record of Russian and Soviet
authorities and their colonial policies, while
also falsely justifying Russia’s war of

319

aggression in Ukraine as an act of selfdefence.

IMPUNITY
On 17 March, the ICC issued arrest warrants
for President Putin and the Commissioner for
Children’s Rights Maria Lvova-Belova on
charges of the war crime of unlawful
deportation and transfer of Ukrainian
children from occupied territories.5 Russia
refused to cooperate with the ICC and
introduced criminal liability for assisting
international organizations or foreign
governments in the prosecution of Russian
officials or military personnel. The
Investigative Committee opened a criminal
case against ICC judges and the ICC
prosecutor, accusing them of prosecuting
“obviously innocent” individuals. In July,
President Putin decided not to attend a
BRICS summit in South Africa shortly before
a court there decided he would be arrested
upon arrival.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Discrimination and violence against migrants,
including by police, remained widespread.
Police arrested hundreds of alleged
undocumented migrants in raids across the
country in May; many reported physical and
psychological abuse in custody.
Authorities used deception and pressure to
recruit foreign migrants to military service.

DISCRIMINATION
On 29 October, hundreds of people stormed
Makhachkala airport in Dagestan, North
Caucasus, seeking to target Jewish people
who they believed had recently arrived from
Israel. Police intervened hours later to restore
order. Similar antisemitic incidents took place
in other parts of North Caucasus.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Russia remained a leading producer and
exporter of fossil fuels, as well as one of the
highest greenhouse gas emitters, and took no
effective steps to reduce its environmental
impact. Rather, it planned to massively
increase production and export of coal and

320

gas and continued to invest in new
production overseas. Climate Action Tracker
described Russia’s emissions targets, policies
and provision of finance as “critically
insufficient”.
Forest wildfires between May and
September, exacerbated by global warming
and often going unchecked for weeks, further
increased carbon emissions and reduced
absorption of CO2.
In May and July, authorities designated two
major environmental organizations,
Greenpeace and the World Wildlife
Foundation, as “undesirable,” thereby
banning them from the country. Previously,
Greenpeace had played an important role in
dealing with the forest fires in Russia.
1. Russian Federation: Dark Times for Human Rights. Amnesty
International Submission to the 44th Session of the UPR Working
Group, 13 November 2023, 3 May
2. “Russia: 20,000 activists subject to heavy reprisals as Russia
continues to crack down on anti-war movement at home”, 20 July
3. “Russian Federation/Ukraine (Crimea): Human rights lawyers must
be immediately and unconditionally released”, 27 October
4. “Ukraine: Russia’s reprisals against prominent Ukrainian human
rights defender who joined the Armed Forces of Ukraine”, 17 August
5. “Russia: ICC’s arrest warrant against Putin a step towards justice for
victims of war crimes in Ukraine”, 17 March

RWANDA
Republic of Rwanda
UK courts found Rwanda’s agreement to
relocate asylum seekers from the UK to be
unlawful. Restrictions on the rights to
freedom of expression and association
continued. Paul Rusesabagina was released
from prison in March after a presidential
pardon. Prison officials faced trial for
alleged torture. Over 100 people died in
floods and landslides; residents in high-risk
zones faced relocation without
compensation. The trial of alleged genocide
financier Félicien Kabuga was suspended
indefinitely. Genocide suspects were
arrested, extradited or convicted by

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Rwandan courts and under universal
jurisdiction.

BACKGROUND
In its June report, the UN Group of Experts
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(DRC) reaffirmed the role of the Rwanda
Defence Force (RDF) in the eastern DRC
conflict, including direct actions and through
support to the M23 armed group (See DRC
entry). Rwanda dismissed the report.
Two RDF officials, both of whom were
named in the UN experts’ report, were
sanctioned by the EU and the USA,
respectively.
In September, the USA listed Rwanda as
complicit in the use or recruitment of child
soldiers, in relation to Rwanda’s backing of
the M23.
While relations with the DRC continued to
deteriorate, Rwanda’s relationship with
Burundi initially showed signs of
improvement. However, relations soured
again in December when Burundi’s president
accused Rwanda of supporting an armed
group (see Burundi entry).Parliamentary
elections were postponed to 2024 to
harmonize with the presidential election
schedule.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In January, referring to refugees from the
DRC, President Kagame said “we cannot
keep being host to refugees for which, later
on, we are held accountable in some way, or
even abused about.” Since late 2022, 13,643
refugees and asylum seekers had fled to
Rwanda from fighting in eastern DRC.
Legal challenges continued in the UK
against the deal to relocate asylum seekers
from the UK to Rwanda (see UK entry). In
June, the Court of Appeal ruled that the
agreement was unlawful because Rwanda
was unsafe for someone claiming asylum.
This was on the grounds that deficiencies in
Rwanda’s asylum process carried a danger of
people being returned to a home country
where they are at risk of persecution or other
ill-treatment. The UK home secretary lodged
an appeal at the Supreme Court, which ruled

The State of the World’s Human Rights

in November to uphold the Court of Appeal’s
decision. In December, Rwanda and the UK
signed a new treaty, and a bill on “the Safety
of Rwanda” was introduced in the UK
parliament.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION
John Williams Ntwali, an investigative
journalist who reported on human rightsrelated issues, died in January in suspicious
circumstances. The police said that he died
in a road traffic accident in the capital Kigali
on 18 January and they had arrested the
driver involved in the collision. The day
before his death, he had raised concerns
with another journalist about his safety.1
Despite the high level of interest in the case,
the driver’s trial was held in the absence of
independent observers; he was convicted of
manslaughter and unintentional bodily harm.
The written verdict lacked significant details,
including the precise location of the accident;
made no reference to any visual evidence
from traffic police said to have attended the
accident; and references to a medical report
were vague.2
Political opposition parties Development and
Liberty for All (DALFA-Umurinzi) and the
Rwandese Platform for Democracy (RPD)
remained unregistered. Shortly after he
established the RPD in 2021, journalist
Christopher Kayumba was accused of rape
for which he was acquitted in February 2023.
In November, he was convicted and given a
two-year sentence (suspended for one year),
following an appeal by the prosecution.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
Paul Rusesabagina, who was convicted in
2021 on terrorism-related charges in a trial
marred by numerous fair trial violations, was
released from prison in March, following
negotiations between the Rwandan and US
governments. In 2022, he had written to
President Kagame requesting a pardon and
committing to stay out of Rwandan politics. In
July, he released a video describing
Rwandans as “prisoners inside their own
country”.

321

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Nine current and former officials of Rubavu
prison, including the former director, were
arrested in August, accused of torturing
inmates. They remained in pretrial detention
at the end of the year. This contrasted with
the lack of action in response to previous
complaints of torture and other ill-treatment.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
At least 115 people were killed by flooding
and landslides in western and northern
Rwanda in May. In anticipation of heavier
rains than usual towards the end of the year,
authorities in the capital, Kigali renewed calls
for 3,131 families living in zones at high risk
of flooding and landslides to relocate before
the rainy season (normally September to
November). In August, Kigali’s mayor advised
that support would not be available to
residents – a policy which, if implemented,
would violate their right to housing. However,
residents deemed to be too vulnerable to
relocate might be compensated.
In June, the government launched the
Revised Green Growth and Climate
Resilience Strategy in support of Rwanda’s
aim to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by
38% by 2030. Its stated objectives include
achieving energy security and low carbon
supply; sustainable land use and water
resource management; and social protection
to reduce vulnerability to climate change
impacts. The strategy would require USD 2
billion annually to implement, with USD 700
million to be provided from government
budgets, and additional financing from
sources including climate funds, the private
sector and development partners.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In August, appeal judges at the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
(IRMCT) ordered that the trial of 90-year-old
alleged chief genocide financier Félicien
Kabuga be suspended indefinitely. In June,
the court had ruled that he was unfit to stand
trial because of ill health, but had proposed

322

an “alternative finding procedure” that was
rejected on appeal.
Genocide suspect Fulgence Kayishema was
arrested in South Africa in May and faced 54
charges of violating domestic law. He was rearrested in August on a new arrest warrant
that would allow his extradition to the IRMCT
in Tanzania.
Genocide suspect Théoneste Niyongira was
deported from Malawi to Rwanda in June.
In February, Rwanda’s High Court Chamber
for International Crimes sentenced Jean
Twagiramungu to 25 years’ imprisonment on
genocide charges. He had been extradited
from Germany in 2017. In March, the
Rwanda Court of Appeals upheld Ladislas
Ntaganzwa’s life sentence following his
conviction on genocide charges in 2020.
In September, genocide convict Sylvestre
Gacumbitsi died in Mali while serving a 30year sentence handed down by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
Aloys Simba, who had been granted early
release by the IRMCT, died in Benin in July.
There was progress on several genocide
cases held in Europe under the principle of
universal jurisdiction. In June, the Paris
Assize Court found Philippe Hategekimana, a
former military policeman, guilty of genocide
and crimes against humanity and sentenced
him to life imprisonment. Pierre Kayondo,
former prefect of Kibuye, was arrested in
September in France and charged with
complicity in genocide and crimes against
humanity. Pierre-Claver Karangwa was
arrested in the Netherlands in October. In
June, the supreme court in the Netherlands
had refused his extradition to Rwanda due to
fair trial concerns. In Belgium, Seraphin
Twahirwa and Pierre Basabose were found
guilty of genocide and war crimes in
December. Also in December, a Paris court
found Sosthène Munyemana guilty on
genocide charges and sentenced him to 24
years in prison.
1. “Rwandan authorities should ensure an independent investigation
into John Williams Ntwali’s death”, 31 January
2. “Rwanda: Questionable trial after journalist’s death”, 15 March

The State of the World’s Human Rights

SAUDI ARABIA
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
The authorities targeted individuals for
peacefully exercising their rights to freedom
of expression or association, and some were
sentenced to lengthy prison terms or death
following grossly unfair trials. Human rights
defenders continued to be arbitrarily
detained or subject to travel bans following
their conditional release from prison. Courts
handed down death sentences following
grossly unfair trials, including in cases of
individuals who were children at the time of
their alleged crimes, and people were
executed for a wide range of crimes.
Migrants were subjected to serious human
rights abuses, including killings at the
border with Yemen and treatment that may
amount to human trafficking for the
purpose of labour exploitation. Thousands
of people were involuntarily returned to
their home country as part of a nationwide
crackdown on undocumented migrants.
Women continued to face discrimination in
law and practice.

BACKGROUND
Saudi Arabia and the EU held their third
human rights dialogue in Brussels, Belgium
on 28 November. The EU raised concerns
regarding Saudi Arabia’s continued
application of the death penalty, including for
drug-related offences and non-lethal crimes,
as well as lengthy prison terms imposed for
social media activity.
The Saudi Arabia-led coalition in the longrunning armed conflict in Yemen continued
to be implicated in war crimes and other
serious violations of international law (see
Yemen entry).

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The Specialized Criminal Court (SCC),
established to try terrorism-related crimes,
convicted and sentenced individuals to
lengthy prison terms following grossly unfair
trials solely for exercising their rights to

The State of the World’s Human Rights

freedom of association and expression,
including online on X (formerly Twitter).
UNFAIR TRIALS
The authorities continued to arbitrarily detain
individuals without giving them any
opportunity to challenge the lawfulness of
their detention, and in many cases sentenced
them to lengthy prison terms or death on
vague, “catch-all” charges that criminalize
peaceful opposition as “terrorism” in violation
of their fair trial rights.
In January, the SCC resentenced Salma alShehab, a PhD student at Leeds University in
the UK and mother of two, to 27 years in
prison followed by a 27-year travel ban after
the Supreme Court in the capital, Riyadh,
referred her 34-year prison term back to the
SCC’s appeals chamber. The SCC upheld her
convictions for terrorism-related offences,
including “supporting those who seek to
disrupt public order, destabiliz[ing] security
and the stability of the state” and publishing
tweets that “disturb public order, destabilize
the security of society and the stability of the
state.” The charges arose from posts she
published on X in support of women’s rights.1
In May, the Supreme Court upheld the 10year prison sentence of Egyptian physician
Sabry Shalaby.2 The SCC convicted him in
August 2022 following a grossly unfair trial for
supporting and joining the Muslim
Brotherhood, which is classified as a terrorist
organization in Saudi Arabia. He was held in
solitary confinement for the first 10 months of
his detention, which included three months
in incommunicado detention. Throughout his
detention, he repeatedly asked to see a
neurologist about health complications
arising from spinal cord surgery, but his
requests were denied. In addition, he
received inadequate care for asthma and
cataracts arising from underlying health
conditions.
The trial of religious cleric Salman Alodah
continued before the SCC into its fifth year.
He faced 37 charges, including affiliation
with the Muslim Brotherhood and others
related to his calls for government reforms
and “regime change” in the Arab region.

323

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders continued to be
arbitrarily detained, including following the
expiry of their prison terms, and subjected to
judicially imposed travel bans.
Mohammed al-Qahtani, founding member
of the Saudi Civil and Political Rights
Association, remained forcibly disappeared;
his prison term expired in November 2022.3
Prominent woman human rights defender
Loujain al-Hathloul, who was released in
February 2021 after serving two and a half
years in prison, continued to be subjected to
a travel ban.

DEATH PENALTY
Courts handed down and upheld death
sentences imposed for a wide range of
crimes, including in cases of individuals who
were under the age of 18 at the time of the
crime. The authorities carried out executions
for a wide range of crimes throughout the
year.
On 12 March, Hussein Abo al-Kheir, a
Jordanian father of eight, was executed. He
had been sentenced to death for drug
smuggling following a grossly unfair trial.
During his pretrial detention, he was held
incommunicado, denied access to legal
representation and tortured to make a
“confession”. The authorities failed to return
his body to his family following the
execution.4
In May, the Saudi Human Rights
Commission confirmed in a letter to Amnesty
International that: “the application of the
death penalty on juveniles for ta’zir crimes
has been completely abolished”. Ta’zir
crimes are those for which the death penalty
is not mandated under Islamic law. Contrary
to such assurances, at least seven child
offenders remained at imminent risk of
execution, including Abdullah al-Derazi and
Jalal Labbad. The Supreme Court upheld the
death sentences against them in 2023
without informing their families or lawyers.5
In July, the SCC sentenced to death 54year-old retired teacher Mohammad bin
Nasser al-Ghamdi solely for his peaceful
online activity on Twitter (now known as X)

324

and YouTube.6 He was convicted under
articles 30, 34, 43 and 44 of Saudi Arabia’s
counterterrorism law for offences that
included: “renouncing allegiance to the
guardians of the state”; “supporting a
terrorist ideology and a terrorist entity [the
Muslim Brotherhood]”; “using his accounts
on Twitter and YouTube to follow and promote
individuals who seek to destabilize public
order”; and “sympathizing with individuals
detained on terrorism-related charges.”
Mohammad al-Ghamdi’s charge sheet cited
several tweets that were used to convict him,
including posts in which he criticized Saudi
Arabia’s king and crown prince and its
foreign policy, called for the release of
detained religious clerics, and protested
against increased prices. He was not
accused of any violent crime.

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The authorities continued their crackdown on
individuals accused of violating residency,
border and labour regulations, including
through arbitrary arrests and deportations of
foreign nationals solely due to their irregular
immigration status.
According to the Ministry of Interior,
between January and December, at least
468,000 foreign nationals were returned to
their home country out of over 777,000
arrested for “violating labour, residency and
border security” regulations. In the same
period, over 40,000 foreign nationals, most of
them Ethiopian and Yemeni nationals, were
arrested for crossing the border irregularly
from Yemen into Saudi Arabia.
Dozens of Nepali migrant workers
contracted to work in Amazon warehouses
were subjected to serious human rights
abuses, including treatment that may amount
to human trafficking for the purposes of
labour exploitation. The workers were
deceived by recruitment agencies in Saudi
Arabia about the nature of their employer and
the terms and conditions of their jobs before
leaving their home country. Additionally, they
had their wages withheld by third-party
contractors and were housed in wholly
inadequate accommodation. Some were

The State of the World’s Human Rights

verbally or physically abused or threatened
with such abuse, particularly when they
raised complaints about their living and
working conditions. Once these workers were
terminated from deployment with Amazon,
third-party contractors often failed to find
them alternative jobs and stopped paying
them their contractual wage when they were
rendered “jobless”. Contractors also provided
these workers with limited or no support and
failed to give them the required documents to
allow them to change jobs or leave the
country, thereby restricting their freedom of
movement and job mobility.7
During the year, Saudi border guards killed
Ethiopian migrants and asylum seekers who
tried to enter Saudi Arabia across the border
with Yemen. Human Rights Watch
documented how the guards used explosive
weapons against the migrants and shot some
at close range, including children, killing at
least hundreds between March 2022 and
June 2023.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Women continued to face discrimination in
law and practice, including in matters of
marriage, divorce, child custody and
inheritance. Under the country’s Personal
Status Law, fathers are default guardians of
their children. While the mother is
automatically granted custody in the event of
separation, the father is designated as the
child’s legal guardian without due
consideration of the best interests of the
child.
In February, an appeals court overturned an
earlier verdict that had granted US citizen
Carly Morris custody of her daughter. The
ruling was based on Article 128 of the
Personal Status Law, which states that a
custodian loses their custody if they move to
reside in another place where the interests of
the child is not taken into consideration. Carly
Morris was not notified about the court
sessions, which took place in her absence,
and her former husband has since not
allowed her communication with her
daughter.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

In May, Saudi fitness instructor Manahel alOtaibi was charged with “defaming the
kingdom at home and abroad, calling for
rebellion against public order and society’s
traditions and customs, and challenging the
judiciary and its justice” for challenging the
customs and traditions of Saudi Arabia on
social media, including by advocating for
liberal clothing for women, appearing in what
the authorities said was indecent clothing on
social media and calling for the abolition of
male guardianship laws.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Saudi Arabia, a major fossil fuel producer,
also remained one of the world’s top 10 CO2
emitters per capita.
In July, the Financial Times newspaper
reported that Saudi Arabia had blocked a
G20 initiative to cut back on the use of fossil
fuels.
In 2023, the state-owned Saudi Aramco
produced on average more than 12 million
barrels of oil a day. It aims to increase its
output by about 1 million barrels per day by
2027 and increase its production of natural
gas by 50% by 2030. The oil and gas
produced by Aramco have been estimated to
be responsible for more than 4% of global
greenhouse gas emissions since 1965 and,
according to a study, accounted for about
4.8% of all global greenhouse gas emissions
in 2018 – the largest of any oil and gas
company.
1. “Saudi Arabia: Further information: Release woman sentenced to 27
years for tweets: Salma al-Shehab”, 3 April
2. “Saudi Arabia: Jailed Egyptian physician must be released: Dr Sabri
Shalaby”, 21 July
3. “Saudi Arabia: Saudi authorities must release human rights defender
Mohammed al-Qahtani and other ACPRA members who are arbitrarily
detained”, 24 April
4. “Saudi Arabia: Execution of Jordanian man reveals ‘callous disregard
for human life’”, 13 March
5. “Saudi Arabia: Imminent execution of seven young men would violate
kingdom’s promise to abolish death penalty for juveniles”, 15 June
6. “Saudi Arabia: Drop ‘ludicrous’ conviction and death sentence
against man convicted over social media posts”, 31 August
7. Saudi Arabia: ‘Don’t Worry, It’s a Branch of Amazon’: Exploitation of
Migrant Workers Contracted to Amazon in Saudi Arabia, 10 October

325

SENEGAL
Republic of Senegal
The crackdown on the rights to freedom of
expression, association and peaceful
assembly continued in the run-up to the
presidential elections. Human rights
defenders, activists, and journalists were
arbitrarily arrested and detained. Defence
and security forces used excessive force
during protests, resulting in injuries and
deaths. Forced begging by talibé children
continued. Women and girls continued to
face discrimination within marriage.

BACKGROUND
There were political tensions in the run-up to
the February 2024 presidential elections, and
several demonstrations were organized by
opposition parties and civil society
organizations. In May, opposition leader
Ousmane Sonko was sentenced to six
months’ suspended imprisonment for
publicly insulting and defaming a government
minister. On 1 June he was also sentenced
by a court in the capital, Dakar, to two years’
imprisonment for “corrupting youth” following
accusations of rape. The following month he
was charged with insurrection and criminal
conspiracy, among other offences. In July,
President Macky Sall announced he would
not run for a third mandate. The same
month, the Ministry of the Interior dissolved
Ousmane Sonko’s political party PASTEF for
“calling on its supporters to take part in
insurrectionary movements”.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Several protests organized by the main
opposition coalition Yewwi Askan Wi and the
civil society organizations F24 and FRAPP
were banned on the pretext of preventing
public disorder.
The authorities refused to lift the 2011
blanket ban on political demonstrations in
central Dakar, despite an ECOWAS court of
justice ruling.

326

After the June protests in support of
Ousmane Sonko following his two-year
sentence on charges of “corrupting youth”,
access to the internet via mobile data was
restricted by the authorities,1 and TikTok was
only accessible via virtual private network.2
Walf TV, which was covering the protests, had
its signal cut without notice by the Ministry of
Communications, Telecommunications and
Digital Economy during the month of June.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
As of October, more than 1,000 people had
been arrested and detained mostly for their
participation in protests, or for their alleged
connection to PASTEF.
Hannibal Djim, who organized fundraising
campaigns in support of PASTEF, was
arrested in February and detained for
“financing seditious and subversive activities,
calling for insurrection, inciting acts likely to
disturb state security and apology for
violence.” He was still detained at the end of
the year. Falla Fleur was arrested in May and
detained for her Facebook posts in support of
PASTEF and charged with “acts likely to
compromise public security and direct
provocation of an armed assembly”, and was
released on 6 November. Aliou Sane, a
leader of the Y’en a Marre collective and the
F24 platform, was charged with “participation
in an undeclared demonstration and
disturbance of public order.” He was still
detained at the end of the year.
JOURNALISTS
Journalists were arrested, detained and
sentenced to prison terms following trials on
charges including defamation and
disseminating false news.
On 7 March, journalist Pape Ndiaye was
arrested and detained for “spreading false
news” and “contempt of court”, among other
charges, after stating on Walf TV that 19
deputy prosecutors were opposed to
Ousmane Sonko being referred to trial for
alleged rape. He was provisionally released
on 21 June. In May, Serigne Saliou Gueye,
editor of the daily Yoor-Yoor, was arrested
after the newspaper published an article
critical of magistrates following a judicial

The State of the World’s Human Rights

decision in the defamation case against
Ousmane Sonko. He was charged with
“publication of writings likely to discredit
judicial acts or decisions, dissemination of
false news likely to discredit public
institutions, and usurping the position of a
journalist.” He was provisionally released on
21 June.3 Journalist Pape Ale Niang was
arrested on 29 July and charged with “calling
for insurrection and acts or manoeuvres likely
to compromise public security”, after a video
was broadcast in which he discussed
Ousmane Sonko’s recent arrest. He was
provisionally released on 8 August after a
hunger strike.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In July, Oudy Diallo, president of the
Kédougou Alert Environment association and
of the Environment Commission of the
Kédougou Departmental Council, was
sentenced to six months’ imprisonment. He
had been charged with “disseminating false
news, collecting and disseminating personal
data, insulting an adjutant of the Saraya
gendarmerie brigade in the performance of
his duties and defaming a military institution
of the national gendarmerie” after he had
posted a photo of the adjutant on Facebook
and accused him of complicity with Chinese
firms in the alleged illegal exploitation of gold
in Kédougou region.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Between March 2021 and June 2023, at
least 56 people were killed during the
policing of protests, and at least 1,000 were
wounded. In May in the neighbourhood of
Ngor in Dakar, residents protested against
the allocation of a plot of land to the
gendarmerie instead of to education facilities.
Adji Diallo, a 15-year-old girl, was fatally shot
during the protests, according to witnesses
and the media. During the protest,
gendarmes were seen shooting at
demonstrators in response to stone-throwing,
and teargassing protesters and residents in
enclosed areas. Videos verified by Amnesty
International showed gendarmes beating
arrested and handcuffed people and using

The State of the World’s Human Rights

people as human shields while advancing
through a barricaded neighbourhood.4
In June, during violent protests in Dakar
and Ziguinchor following Ousmane Sonko’s
conviction for “corrupting youth”, police and
armed men in civilian clothes sometimes
operating side by side fired live ammunition,5
killing at least 29 people and injuring at least
390, according to the Senegalese Red Cross.
In September, two people were shot dead
by police during violent protests by youths in
the mining locality of Khossanto in Saraya,
Kédougou region. They had been protesting
at the prefect’s decision to replace village
chiefs with administrative authorities as
chairs of local recruitment committees, which
are responsible for recruiting local unskilled
labour for the gold mines.
There was no information on the judicial
investigations into the 14 people who died,
12 of whom were shot by the defence and
security forces, during protests in several
cities in March 2021 after Ousmane Sonko’s
arrest.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
The Family Code still contained provisions
conferring “marital and paternal authority”
solely to men, and designating the husband
as head of the family, thereby denying
women rights and authority over their
household and children. Article 111 of the
Family Code sets the minimum legal age of
marriage for girls as 16, as opposed to 18 for
boys, denying girls’ right to equality in
marriage.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
The practice of forced begging by talibé
children – those studying at daaras (Qur’anic
schools) – was still widespread. The
government failed to adopt the draft
Children’s Code and the draft law on the
status of the daaras. The child protection
sector was still poorly funded, resulting in
lack of protection for talibé children, who
suffer violations of their human rights,
including their right to life, survival and
development and their right to be free from
any forms of physical or mental violence.

327

1. “Senegal: The authorities must immediately halt the police violence
and restore social media”, 2 June
2. “Senegal: New restrictions on individual freedoms must stop”, 4
August
3. Senegal: Human Rights Between Regression and Repression, 14 July
4. “Senegal: Amnesty International denounces excessive use of force in
Ngor”, 12 May
5. “Senegal: Amnesty International calls for independent inquiry into
deadly crackdown on protests”, 9 June

SERBIA

country by the “Serbia against Violence”
coalition, calling for institutional
accountability for the killings and for the
suspension of national broadcasting licences
of television stations promoting violence.
Elections on 17 December saw the ruling
Serbian Progressive Party victorious at
national and local level. However,
international observers documented
considerable irregularities, and tens of
thousands of people gathered for daily rallies
in the capital, Belgrade demanding the
annulment of the elections.

Republic of Serbia

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION

The institutional glorification of convicted
war criminals overshadowed the slow
prosecution of outstanding war crimes.
Independent and investigative journalists
and activists faced threats, vilification and
punitive civil proceedings. A proposed Law
on Internal Affairs further threatened the
right to freedom of assembly. Roma were
disproportionately denied access to social
assistance.

In May, the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals confirmed
the conviction of former Serbian state
security officials Jovica Stanišić and Franko
Simatović, raising their sentences from 12 to
15 years for crimes against humanity and war
crimes in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).1
The glorification of convicted war criminals
fostered a culture of impunity and continued
to affect victims’ access to truth, justice and
reparation. A backlog of 1,700 cases
remained to be investigated.
In October, the Appeal Court annulled the
February conviction at Belgrade High Court
of three Bosnian Serb paramilitaries and a
soldier for the abduction and murder of 20
mainly Montenegrin citizens at Štrpci in BiH
in February 1993.
Reparations continued to exclude around
15,000 civilian war victims, including those
killed or injured outside Serbia or who did not
meet the disability threshold. This affected
victims’ relatives and most victims of warrelated sexual violence.
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
In May, Serbia agreed to provide Kosovo with
access to archives, including classified files,
to assist in locating the whereabouts and
identifying the remains of over 1,620 missing
persons.

BACKGROUND
Serbia continued to balance its commitment
to EU membership with long-standing
political and economic ties with Russia.
Charges of corruption in public office
persisted at all levels.
In March, Serbia and Kosovo agreed to
accept an EU-brokered agreement to
normalize diplomatic relations and encourage
cooperation. Furthermore, Serbia agreed not
to oppose Kosovo’s accession to international
and European institutions. In September,
relations were strained by the murder of a
Kosovo Police officer in Banjska, north
Kosovo, after 30 armed Serbs, three of whom
were killed, barricaded themselves in an
Orthodox monastery. Serbia and NATO then
moved troops to either side of the border but
withdrew in October.
In separate incidents in May, an armed
teenager and a 20-year-old man shot and
killed 17 people and injured 21. The resulting
public outcry triggered marches across the

328

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In April, eight European media organizations
expressed fears that politicians’ overt hostility

The State of the World’s Human Rights

towards critical media, magnified by the
tabloid press, normalized threats and attacks
against independent journalists. Independent
media reporting on the September events in
Banjska (see Background) were labelled
traitors and enemies of the state. Those
investigating organized crime and corruption
were particularly at risk. In July, journalists’
organizations reported that online attacks
were so widespread as to have become
normal. The Independent Association of
Journalists reported 11 physical attacks on
journalists during the year; such reports were
rarely investigated.
Investigative journalists, human rights
defenders and activists were subjected to
strategic lawsuits against public participation
(SLAPPs). In May, the Crime and Corruption
Reporting Network was ordered to pay
damages after being found guilty of
disclosing the identity of individuals – mostly
close to the government – who had filed
SLAPPs against it. In September, the Novi
Sad court dismissed one of the five SLAPPs
brought against Dragana Arsić and two
environmental organizations protesting at
companies’ incursions into the Fruška Gora
national park.
In August, graffiti containing misogynistic
threats against Sofija Todorović of the Youth
Initiative for Human Rights appeared near
her home, after she had voiced support for
Kosovo’s UN membership.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
In January, the government opened a
consultation on the draft Law on Internal
Affairs. This sought to legalize the use of
biometric mass surveillance in public places,
provide authorities with greater discretion to
disperse public assemblies, and authorize an
expansive list of methods of coercion against
protesters, without specifying the threshold or
circumstances in which they would be used.2
There was widespread use of CCTV and other
forms of intrusive surveillance operated by
both the state and private companies.
Demonstrations, especially environmental
protests, were heavily policed, with
participants frequently subjected to often

The State of the World’s Human Rights

unnecessary and excessive force. In March,
riot police were deployed to remove peaceful
protesters attempting to stop tree-felling in
advance of urban development in Novi Sad.
The authorities routinely contracted private
security companies, sometimes in plain
clothes and without visible insignia, to
“police” protests, often using unlawful force.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In November it was revealed that
sophisticated spyware was being used by
“state-sponsored attackers” against members
of civil society.3

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
During the year, at least 27 women were
victims of femicide. Social welfare centres
often lacked social workers or psychologists
trained in domestic violence, and the 24
NGO-run shelters providing counselling,
shelter and legal aid lacked secure funding.
The criminal code’s definition of rape, based
on use of force rather than lack of consent,
was inconsistent with international and
regional standards.
Women journalists, human rights defenders
and activists were often threatened with
violence, both online and in person.

RIGHT TO SOCIAL SECURITY
One year after its implementation, the Law on
Social Card left some people living in extreme
poverty without any social assistance. The
law weakened an already inadequate social
assistance system, which covered fewer than
half of the people living in extreme poverty.
The law disproportionately affected Roma
and people whose disabilities were not
recognized, exacerbating their social and
economic exclusion.4

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In May, the body of a missing 18-year-old
trans woman was found in Belgrade, causing
widespread fear amongst the LGBTI
community. In August, President Vučić
announced he would never approve the Law
on Same Sex Unions, drafted in early 2021.

329

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In March, Médecins Sans Frontières urged
the EU to increase scrutiny of the EU’s border
force (Frontex) and of the excessive violence
and pushbacks at Serbia’s EU borders with
Hungary and Bulgaria. In June, police started
regular evictions of refugees and migrants
from temporary camps in northern Serbia.
UNHCR, the UN refugee agency, reported
that 101,098 individuals had entered the
country by 30 November, but few had sought
asylum.
1. “Bosnia and Herzegovina: War crimes convictions a historic moment
for international justice”, 31 May
2. Serbia: Amnesty International’s Comments on the Draft Law on
Internal Affairs of Republic of Serbia, 27 January
3. “Serbia: Civil society threatened by spyware”, 28 November
4. Serbia: Trapped by Automation: Poverty and Discrimination in
Serbia’s Welfare State, 4 December

SIERRA LEONE
Republic of Sierra Leone
The rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly continued to be
restricted, especially around the
presidential election period. Food insecurity
was widespread. The government attempted
to address deforestation. Women’s and girls’
rights were violated but women’s
representation in public offices increased.
Draft legislation to better protect children’s
rights remained pending.

BACKGROUND
President Julius Maada Bio was re-elected on
24 June amid controversy over the lack of
transparency in the ballot counting process.
Food and fuel prices were high; the inflation
rate exceeded 50% in August.
Judicial authorities increased the frequency
of court hearings in correctional centres to
decongest prisons and reduce pretrial
detention periods.
In October, the government finalized a
policy which aimed to ensure that work done

330

by NGOs falls in line with national
development priorities.
In November, gunmen tried to break into a
military armoury and also attacked two
prisons in the capital, Freetown, freeing
almost 2,000 inmates. At least 20 people
died. The government said it was a coup
attempt, imposed a national night-time
curfew for almost one month, and made over
50 arrests.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
A few months before the election, the
Political Parties Registration Commission
banned political street rallies and prohibited
parties from holding campaign events in
more than one venue, on security grounds.
In April, the Special Investigation
Commission (SIC) released a report following
its investigation into the killing of six police
officers and at least 27 protesters and
bystanders during August 2022 protests.1
The report described the protests as an
insurrection and an attempt to overthrow the
government. Although SIC recommended
training for police officers to avoid “highhandedness”, it failed to recommend an
investigation into the security forces’ use of
excessive force.
On 13 June, at least eight protesters were
arrested in Freetown for an “unlawful
demonstration to disturb the public peace”.
They were demanding the disclosure of
voters’ registration data and the resignation of
the chief electoral commissioner.
On 21 June, police used excessive force to
disperse over 100 people protesting alleged
discrepancies in the electoral process, in
front of the All People’s Congress (APC)
opposition party headquarters in Freetown.
One protester died allegedly from a gunshot
wound for which the police denied
responsibility. Sixty-six protesters were
subsequently arrested.
On 25 June, security forces surrounded
APC’s building during a press conference
where supporters awaited election results.
They used live bullets and tear gas and a
party volunteer died after being shot.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

In September, two people died from
gunshot wounds when security forces
violently dispersed protests in Freetown and
other areas. The police said that they made
72 arrests and had opened an investigation
into the deaths. Over 40 people were charged
with offences ranging from conspiracy to
commit a crime to disorderly behaviour.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Press freedom suffered its biggest decline in
18 years. Sierra Leone fell 28 places in
Reporters Without Borders’ ranking on
freedom of expression, from 46 to 74 out of
180 countries.
In April, an entrepreneur was arrested after
publishing a video criticizing the government
and accusing the president of killing people.
She was released on bail after two days and
the police said they were investigating her for
a violation of a Cyber Security and Crime Act
provision.

RIGHT TO FOOD
In April, a World Food Programme report
estimated that as of February, 78% of the
population were food insecure while 20% of
households were severely food insecure. The
World Bank repeatedly listed Sierra Leone as
being among the 10 countries with the
highest food price inflation. In October, the
president launched the “Feed Salone”
programme to increase agricultural
productivity, export revenues from crops and
food self-sufficiency. In addition, the initiative
would support small-scale farmers with
technical and financial assistance, and
encourage private investment in agricultural
infrastructure.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In July, the government announced a
temporary ban on logging and transportation
of timber, effective from 1 August until 31
October, to tackle deforestation.
Fishermen in the coastal town of Tombo
complained about the depletion of fish stocks
which they attributed to foreign trawlers
fishing illegally and using practices that
destroy the ecosystem.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
In January, the Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment bill became law; it requires
that 30% of seats in public office be held by
women. By July, women’s representation in
parliament had doubled to an unprecedented
41, while the percentage of women
appointed as cabinet members reached
30%. In September, the Ministry of Gender
and Children’s Affairs said it would begin
tracking and assessing gender
mainstreaming within various ministries,
departments and agencies nationwide.
In February, the NGO, AdvocAid, demanded
an end to violence by law enforcement
officials as a police officer went on trial for
raping a girl in a police station.
Female genital mutilation remained
prevalent. In March, a two-year-old died after
being subjected to the practice during an
initiation process into the “Bondo” secret
society. The Human Rights Commission
engaged stakeholders in discussions on a
national strategy – drafted in 2015 but never
applied – to end such procedures.
In March, a report by the integrated African
Health Observatory, a health information
platform for African member states of the
WHO, reported a drop in the maternal
mortality rate of almost 60% between 2017
and 2020.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
In April, the Child Rights Coalition urged the
government to pass the Child Rights Act
2022, saying its provisions would provide
child-friendly complaints mechanisms within
the National Commission for Children, and
close gaps in addressing issues like child
justice, and early and child marriage. In the
same month, parliament passed the Basic
and Senior Secondary Education Act 2023,
which prohibits parents or guardians from
refusing to send their children to school,
corporal punishment and discrimination in
relation to admission to, or treatment in,
schools. The act also provides for better
access to schooling for pregnant girls and
parent learners.

331

A lack of shelters to accommodate
vulnerable children hindered the fight against
child labour. In July, an African Programming
and Research Initiative to End Slavery report
revealed that child trafficking had increased
in the north-west region; 34% of five to 17year-olds in the Kambia district had
experienced child trafficking while about
40% were subjected to child labour.
1. “Sierra Leone: Seven months after August’s protests which turned
violent in some locations, no justice yet for those injured or the
families of those killed”, 20 March

SINGAPORE
Republic of Singapore
Restrictive laws were used to silence
government critics. Executions continued,
including of the first woman known to have
been executed in 20 years.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities continued to crack down on
human rights activists and government
critics.1
In November, a court sentenced human
rights lawyer M Ravi to 21 days in prison and
fined him SGD 10,000 (USD 7,453) over
nine instances of contempt of court. In
March, a court also suspended his licence for
five years in relation to his defence of a death
row inmate in 2020. In May, the Ministry of
Home Affairs ordered M Ravi, Kirsten Han
and the anti-death penalty group
Transformative Justice Collective of which she
is a member, and others to issue
“corrections” under the Protection from
Online Falsehoods and Manipulation Act
(POFMA). These related to their social media
posts and online articles raising fair trial
concerns in the case of Tangaraju Suppiah
who was executed in April.2
In June, the government ordered the
blocking of US-based news website Asia
Sentinel for its refusal to comply with a
POFMA order “to correct” an article about

332

the use of government power against
dissenters.
Judicial harassment of Terry Xu, editor of
independent media outlet The Online Citizen,
continued. In April, the High Court fined him
and ordered him to pay costs amounting to
SGD 30,000 (USD 22,474) for contempt of
court, in relation to the publication of an open
letter in 2021 criticizing the chief justice.
In March, the government announced that
the prime minister's brother Lee Hsien Yang
and his wife were under investigation for
perjury. They were also accused of leaving
the country to avoid police questioning. Lee
Hsien Yang was embroiled in a dispute with
his brother over their family's estate and had
become increasingly critical of his brother’s
government in recent years. In November,
Lee Hsien Yang was ordered to pay damages
to the law and foreign ministers who had filed
defamation suits against him for Facebook
posts in which they claimed he accused
them of corruption.
Parliament passed the Online Criminal
Harms Act in July, giving the government
sweeping powers to restrict or block online
content and raising concerns it could be
used against critics.

DEATH PENALTY
Executions continued after being resumed in
2022. All of those executed were convicted of
drug-related charges and sentenced to the
mandatory death penalty. Proceedings in
many cases did not meet international fair
trial standards. Among those hanged during
the year was Saridewi Djamani in the first
known execution of a woman in Singapore
since 2004.3
1. “Singapore: Suppression of Activists, Critics Continues Ahead of
Elections”, 16 May
2. “Singapore: Arbitrary and unlawful execution for drug-related offence
shows disregard for human rights”, 26 April
3. “Singapore: Unlawful and shameful drug executions continue,
including of first known woman in 20 years”, 28 July

The State of the World’s Human Rights

SLOVAKIA
Slovak Republic
Discrimination against Roma persisted,
including in education and in the public
housing system. Parliament failed to adopt
a consent-based definition of rape.
Parliamentarians again attempted without
success to adopt amendments that would
restrict access to abortion. Irregular
migrants were subjected to arbitrary
detention and other human rights
violations. There was still no procedure for
gender legal recognition based on the
principle of self-determination.

DISCRIMINATION
RIGHT TO EDUCATION
In April, Slovakia was referred by the
European Commission to the Court of Justice
of the EU for failing to effectively tackle
discrimination in education, as set out in the
EU’s Race Equality Directive. Landmark
judgments by the Supreme Court of Slovakia
and the Regional Court in Prešov ruled that
the continuing existence of schools attended
mainly by Roma children – as well as their
unlawful placement in “special” classes –
violated the right to equal access to
education and was discriminatory.
EXCESSIVE AND UNNECESSARY USE OF FORCE
Incidents of police brutality against Roma
continued. The government failed to take
steps to comply with judgments by the
European Court of Human Rights requiring
that Slovakia ensure effective access to
justice for minors; that courts effectively
examine allegations of humiliating treatment
by the police; and that possible racist motives
for arresting and ill-treating people are
effectively investigated.
RIGHT TO HOUSING
Roma people continued to live
disproportionately in segregated,
environmentally hazardous housing with
inadequate access to water, sanitation and
electricity.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
No progress was made towards ratifying the
Council of Europe Convention on preventing
and combating violence against women and
domestic violence (Istanbul Convention).
Parliament failed to adopt a consent-based
definition of rape.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
No effective compensation mechanism had
been established for women who were
illegally sterilized between 1966 and 2004.
Several bills were proposed to restrict safe
and legal abortions, but these were not
passed by parliament.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In September, the Public Defender of Rights
released findings claiming that irregular
migrants were detained longer than legally
permitted in the temporary detention centre
in Veľký Krtíš.
From October onwards, every migrant
entering Slovakia irregularly was placed in a
detention centre for foreigners.
The Public Defender also raised concerns
regarding several human rights violations at
the police detention centre for foreigners in
Sečovce, including its restrictive regime, lack
of meaningful activities, lack of opportunities
to connect with family, lack of information
about legal aid and legal status, problematic
access to adequate healthcare, and a ban on
wearing one’s own clothes.
In October, 45 irregular migrants went on
hunger strike after being arbitrarily detained
at the police detention facility in Medveďov.
They demanded their release to open
facilities, and access to legal aid and
assistance with social support.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Parliament failed to pass a law which would
have granted same-sex couples the option to
access each other’s medical documentation.
Reform was overdue on regulating same-sex
couples’ unions and parenthood, and on
transgender people’s rights, including
marriage and legal gender recognition –
which still required gender-affirming

333

healthcare – in violation of the right to selfidentification. From March to June, there
were attempts in parliament to make gender
recognition virtually impossible, but these
were unsuccessful.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
After many delays, in March the former
minister of health approved professional
guidelines on the provision of gender
affirming healthcare. However, the guidelines
were ignored by some healthcare providers
and state institutions, and their validity was
questioned by several public officials,
including a former prime minister.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
December saw the closure of the Nováky
power plant, the last facility producing
electricity from domestic coal sources, as a
consequence of the 2018 decision to end
government support for domestic coal
mining. It was estimated that the closure
would reduce CO2 emissions by more than 1
million tonnes. However, the use of coal
continues in domestic heating and in
industry, and a liquefied natural gas terminal
in Bratislava with an expected lifespan of 20
to 40 years was scheduled for completion in
2026.
The Climate Act, in draft form since 2021,
had not yet been enacted. Climate Action
Network criticized the “very low ambition”
contained in the legislation.

SLOVENIA
Republic of Slovenia
New legislation ended legal proceedings
against people who violated the blanket ban
on protests during the Covid-19 pandemic.
Severe family doctor shortages left
approximately 140,000 people without
adequate access to primary healthcare. The
president proposed legislation to restore
residency rights to the “erased”. Slovenia
continued returning asylum seekers to

334

Croatia. Government set new targets for
renewables and greenhouse emissions.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
In September, the National Assembly
adopted legislation to end legal proceedings
initiated against individuals who defied
certain restrictions, including on protests,
enacted during the Covid-19 pandemic and
ordered a refund of all fines paid.
In May, the Constitutional Court lifted the
suspension – in place since February – of
amendments to the law on Radio-Television
Slovenia (RTV SLO), regulating the
composition of its governing board. Media
organizations noted that the amendments
would significantly reduce the possibility of
political interference and allow RTV SLO to
establish its editorial independence after
years under the control of the previous
governments.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
In July, the National Assembly adopted the
long-awaited and amended Long-Term Care
Act. The act envisaged far-reaching systemic
solutions to address the needs of people
requiring full-time care, both at home and in
care institutions.
Due to significant shortages of family
doctors across the country, approximately
140,000 people remained without effective
access to primary healthcare. The civil
society initiative Voice of the People warned
that the lack of doctors led to significant
delays in people receiving their first
examination, diagnosis and therapy and may
have caused preventable deaths. The
initiative said that government measures to
provide primary healthcare services through
community health centres were ineffective.
After floods in August, the authorities
implemented a series of measures to support
people affected by devastating floods that left
six people dead and hundreds without homes
in north and central Slovenia. The measures
ranged from immediate support for
households and businesses to long-term

The State of the World’s Human Rights

rebuilding of destroyed roads and bridges, as
well as flood safety infrastructure.

DISCRIMINATION
THE “ERASED”
In October, the president proposed legislation
that could restore permanent residency for
the so-called “erased” people, citizens of
other former Yugoslav republics who were
unconstitutionally removed from the official
registry of permanent residents when
Slovenia declared independence over 30
years ago. More than half of approximately
25,000 “erased” people were unable to
restore their residency status or receive
compensation from the state.
LGBTI PEOPLE
People seeking to change their legal gender
in identity documents were still required to
obtain a certificate from a health institution or
a doctor, which in practice meant obtaining a
mental health disorder diagnosis.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The authorities recorded 60,587 irregular
entries by refugees and migrants, a
significant increase compared with previous
years. Slovenia continued to return asylum
seekers to Croatia, despite well-documented
reports of widespread abuse of refugees and
migrants by the Croatian border police.
In June, the Administrative Court ruled in
the case of an asylum seeker from
Afghanistan, that the practice of detaining
asylum seekers before they lodged asylum
applications violated their constitutional right
to personal liberty.
In September, the ombudsman said the
overcrowding in the reception centre for
asylum seekers in the capital, Ljubljana,
violated people’s right to personal dignity,
privacy and security.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In June, the government updated its draft
Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan
and set new targets, including 30-35% of
energy production from renewable sources
and a 37-40% reduction in emissions by
2030. Local civil society groups said

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Slovenia’s targets were not meeting the goals
set in the Paris Agreement and needed to be
more ambitious.

SOMALIA
Federal Republic of Somalia
The conflict between the government and
Al-Shabaab continued, and all parties
committed serious abuses of international
humanitarian and human rights law with
impunity. Insecurity, drought, floods and
food insecurity caused the displacement of
over 2.9 million people and a dire
humanitarian crisis. Internally displaced
people faced human rights violations;
women and girls were particularly exposed
to gender-based and conflict-related sexual
violence. The right to freedom of expression
was restricted, and journalists were
attacked, beaten, and arbitrarily arrested
and prosecuted. In Somaliland, a new
conflict erupted in the city of Las Anod in
Sool region, leading to civilian casualties,
destruction of civilian property and massive
displacement. Somaliland authorities also
restricted the rights to freedom of
expression and peaceful assembly.

BACKGROUND
In February, the government announced
plans for a comprehensive military operation
against Al-Shabaab and established a
frontline states-level initiative, comprising
military forces from Djibouti, Ethiopia and
Kenya.
In Puntland, the first one-person, one-vote
district council elections were held in May.
The African Union Transitional Mission in
Somalia (ATMIS) concluded the first phase of
the plan to transfer security responsibilities to
Somalia’s army and police force, withdrawing
2,000 troops in June which raised concerns
about civilian protection. ATMIS resumed the
withdrawal of a further 3,000 troops in
December, a process which had previously
been halted following a request from the
government for a three-month pause.

335

Political tensions increased in Somaliland
due to elections planned for 2024 and a new
conflict in the Sool region.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
Civilians continued to bear the brunt of the
ongoing conflict between the government and
its international allies on one hand, and the
armed group Al-Shabaab on the other.
Massive civilian casualties were reported
throughout the year. There was no
accountability for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law.
In March, the president announced the
second phase of the offensive against AlShabaab, referred to as “Operation Black
Lion”, which aimed to liberate the remaining
territories under Al-Shabaab’s control
throughout the country.
Al-Shabaab increased its targeted attacks
against government and allied forces and
also carried out indiscriminate attacks against
civilians. According to the UN, there were
945 civilian casualties (342 killed and 603
injured) between February and October. AlShabaab was responsible for 312 civilian
casualties, while the rest were attributed to
state security forces, clan militias, and
international and regional forces.
On 23 September, a truck bomb explosion
in the central Somali town of Beledweyne
killed at least 18 people and injured 40 more.
On 29 September, a suicide bombing inside
the Bar Bulsho tea shop, near the
presidential palace in the capital, Mogadishu,
killed at least seven people. Al-Shabaab
claimed responsibility for the attack.

RIGHT TO FOOD
Drought, floods and the impact of the war in
Ukraine on food imports created a dire
humanitarian crisis. According to the UN,
nearly 8.25 million people, almost half the
population, needed immediate life-saving
humanitarian and protection assistance. The
drought devastated the agriculture sector,
which provides up to 90% of Somalia’s
exports, and led to increased displacement
and loss of livelihoods. One third of all
livestock died in the worst-affected areas. An

336

estimated 5 million people experienced food
crisis or worse outcomes, including 96,000
people facing catastrophic hunger. An
estimated 1.8 million children, including
infants, faced acute malnutrition, with almost
478,000 children likely to be severely
malnourished. Meanwhile, Al-Shabaab
restricted humanitarian access in areas
under their control, compounding the crisis.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S
RIGHTS
Internally displaced people continued to face
significant human rights violations and
abuses. More than 2.9 million people were
displaced due to the floods, drought, conflict
and food insecurity. According to the UN,
over 105,000 individuals – the majority
already internally displaced people – were
forcibly evicted between January and
December across the country.
Most of those displaced were older people,
children and women, including pregnant
women and lactating mothers. The lack of
adequate shelter and privacy in overcrowded
internally displaced people’s settlements
increased women's and children’s
vulnerability to violations such as genderbased violence, including rape and physical
assaults.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Gender-based violence, including conflictrelated sexual violence against women and
girls, continued. Between February and June,
the UN reported four conflict-related sexual
violence incidents affecting nine women,
including a pregnant woman with disabilities,
and four girls. Five of the survivors had been
internally displaced as a result of the drought.
The ongoing drought increased the
vulnerability of internally displaced people to
gender-based violence. Women and girls
were at heightened risk of sexual violence
and abuse when travelling long distances to
fetch water for their families.
In August, the UN Independent Expert on
the situation of human rights in Somalia
reported that sexual and gender-based
violence was pervasive, with rape, gang rape,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

female genital mutilation and domestic
violence among the most common forms.
The federal parliament failed to pass the
sexual offences and the female genital
mutilation bills.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The right to freedom of expression and media
freedom was restricted. Journalists were
occasionally attacked by security forces and
were subjected to threats, harassment,
intimidation, beatings, arbitrary arrests and
prosecution.
On 13 February, the Banadir Regional Court
in Mogadishu sentenced Abdalle Ahmed
Mumin, a journalist and secretary general of
the Somali Journalists Syndicate (SJS) to two
months’ imprisonment for “disobeying
government orders” pursuant to article 505
of the penal code. He was taken to
Mogadishu Central Prison, where prison
officials refused to detain him, saying he had
already served more than two months as he
was first arrested in October 2022. On 23
February, Abdalle Ahmed Mumin was rearrested while attending a public meeting
convened by a senatorial committee and was
detained at Mogadishu Central Prison where
he remained until his release on 26 March.
The following day the court lifted a travel ban
against him.
In March, the president signed the National
Security and Intelligence Agency (NISA) Act
into law. The Act contains overly broad
provisions, including prohibiting anyone from
disseminating information about intelligence
activities and NISA officers. Such provisions
are likely to be used to prosecute journalists,
political opposition members, and human
rights defenders and activists who publish
information about government abuses. The
mass surveillance powers given to the agency
– including the authority to monitor
communications, including internet and
postal communications – could also be used
to violate the rights to freedom of expression
and privacy.
On 16 April, police in Mogadishu arbitrarily
arrested four journalists while they reported
from a bomb blast site in Hamar Jajab

The State of the World’s Human Rights

neighbourhood. Two of them, Mohamed Said
Nur and Qasim Ibrahim Adan, worked for the
Risaala Media Corporation; and Mohamud
Abdirashid Sofeysane and Isaq Rashid
worked for 5TV. They were all released the
same day without charge.
On 17 August, plain-clothes security officers
arrested Mohamed Ibrahim Osman Bulbul, a
journalist with Kaab TV and the SJS’s
secretary of information and human rights.1
He was arrested the day after he had
published a story about alleged
misappropriation of EU funds intended for
police training. On 19 August he was brought
before the Banadir Regional Court, which
granted a request by the police to hold him
for seven days pending further investigation.
During his detention, officers from the
Criminal Investigation Department
confiscated and searched his phones to
access the sources of his reporting. On 25
September, he was charged with offences
under the penal code including bringing the
state into contempt, and circulating false and
tendentious news. He was transferred to
Mogadishu Central Prison on 28 September,
but the court dismissed the charges and
released him on 11 October.
On 16 October, Abdifatah Moalim Nur,
director of Somali Cable Television, was killed
in an Al-Shabaab suicide attack at
Mogadishu’s Blue-Sky restaurant. At least
four other people were injured in the same
attack.

SOMALILAND
FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
The assassination on 26 December 2022 of
Abdifatah Abdullahi Abdi, a politician from
the Dhulbahante clan in Las Anod, Sool
region, by unidentified armed men triggered
widespread protests. Somaliland security
forces responded by using excessive force.
The UN Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) said 12 protesters were killed and
59 injured during the protests between late
December 2022 and early January 2023.
The Somaliland authorities withdrew security
forces from Las Anod in early January in
response to continuing anger and widespread

337

protests over the killings. This paved the way
for prominent Dhulbahante personalities
including clan elders to enter the town. The
elders held consultative meetings between 28
January and 5 February and issued a
declaration that the Sool and Sanaag regions
were not part of Somaliland’s administration.
INDISCRIMINATE ATTACKS
Following the Dhulbahante clan elders’
declaration, clashes between Somaliland
security forces and armed fighters affiliated
with the Dhulbahante clan began on 6
February, escalating into a situation of noninternational armed conflict.2
Somaliland security forces indiscriminately
shelled Las Anod, resulting in the unlawful
killing and injuring of civilians, including
women, children, older people with health
conditions, and healthcare workers. Most
were killed in indiscriminate attacks involving
rockets, mortars and other explosive weapons
with wide-area effects. According to UNSOM,
36 civilians were killed and 270 injured.
On 6 February, seven-year-old Rayan
Abdullahi Ahmed was killed by munitions
while inside her aunt’s house in the Samalay
neighbourhood, in southern Las Anod. On
the same day, Amina Jama Ibrahim was
killed by munitions inside her house in the
Ex-Control neighbourhood in eastern Las
Anod. On 11 February, Abdisalam Saed
Muse, a nurse volunteer with the Somali Red
Crescent Society, was killed when a stray
bullet hit him at Gargaar hospital. On 21
February, Saynab Yusuf Dheeg was killed by
munitions while sitting with four other women
near her house.
VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW
Somaliland forces carried out indiscriminate
ground attacks that damaged or destroyed
civilian infrastructure.
The Las Anod general hospital was hit
several times between February and August.
Doctors Without Borders said that the
hospital was hit during fighting on 28
February, causing partial damage to the
structure, and bringing work in the pediatric
ward and the blood bank to a standstill.
Hundreds of other civilian buildings including

338

two mosques and three schools were also
damaged.
The indiscriminate attacks and fighting led
to between 154,000 and 203,000 people
being displaced to neighbouring towns and
villages, and to Ethiopia. Most of the
displaced started returning to Las Anod in
late August due to a pause in hostilities.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Somaliland authorities continued to restrict
the right to freedom of expression and media
freedom by arbitrarily arresting, detaining and
prosecuting journalists and critics.
In particular, they restricted reporting on the
conflict in Las Anod. On 30 January, the
Ministry of Information issued a directive,
warning “against the dissemination of news,
reporting and opinions that could fuel the
situation in Las Anod.”
On 15 May, the authorities arbitrarily
arrested and detained journalist Busharo Ali
Mohamed (also known as Busharo Baanday)
in Wajaale on the border with Ethiopia. She
was transferred to Hargeisa where she was
detained for three months. On 16 July she
was charged with several offences under the
Somali penal code including circulating false
and tendentious news and for disobeying
laws. The Maroodi Jeh Regional Court in
Hargeisa convicted her and sentenced her to
one year in jail, but she was released on 15
August after paying a fine of SOS 123,788
(around USD 217).
1. “Somalia: Free journalist jailed for investigative report: Mohamed
Ibrahim Osman Bulbul”, 6 October
2. “Somaliland: Urgent investigation needed as fighting takes heavy toll
on civilians in Las Anod”, 20 April

SOUTH AFRICA
Republic of South Africa
Incidents of gender-based violence
continued while perpetrators enjoyed
impunity. The Department of Basic
Education failed in its promise to eradicate
pit latrines in schools. Illiteracy rates
among Grade 4 pupils rose. There were

The State of the World’s Human Rights

concerns that the National Health
Insurance Bill might have an adverse
impact on access to quality healthcare.
Access to quality and safe drinking water
declined. Refugees and migrants continued
to be denied access to primary healthcare.
The murder rate remained high. Police
continued to use excessive force in
response to protests. Threats against human
rights defenders, activists and whistleblowers, and attempts to silence journalists
continued. The government made no
progress on the decommissioning of coalfired power stations.

BACKGROUND
According to official statistics 31.9% of the
population were unemployed, and 32.7% of
15- to 24-year-olds were not in employment,
education or training.
The ICC’s warrant for the arrest of Russian
President Vladimir Putin – who was invited to
attend the BRICS summit in Johannesburg –
put the government in a difficult position
because of its relationship with Russia.
Steps were taken to start implementing the
recommendations made in the 2022
Commission of Enquiry into State Capture
report.
The South African Human Rights
Commission’s report investigating the 2021
unrest in KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng
provinces, and due to be released in July,
remained outstanding.
The worsening energy crisis affected the
rights to access water, health and education.
A system known as “loadshedding” was
used, where rolling, planned electricity
blackouts were imposed for extended
periods, due to corruption and
mismanagement of ageing infrastructure.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
High levels of gender-based violence
continued. Crime statistics for the period
between July and September showed 13,090
reported sexual offence cases. Murders of
women decreased by 10.9% compared to
the same period in the previous year, with
881 women killed. The National Council on

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Gender-Based Violence and Femicide Bill,
intended to establish a council to oversee the
implementation of the National Strategic Plan
on Gender-Based Violence and Femicide,
was released for public comment in May,
with public hearings occurring in June.1 In
December, the National Council of Provinces
released an updated version of the bill for a
second round of public comments.
Impunity for gender-based violence
continued. The National Prosecuting
Authority revealed it had insufficient evidence
to prosecute the murders of Popi Qwabe and
Bongeka Phungula six years earlier, but
instead referred their cases to the Protea
magistrate’s court for an inquest. The women
were shot dead, and their bodies dumped by
the side of the road in Johannesburg in May
2017.
More than a year after eight women were
robbed and gang-raped by armed men while
filming at an abandoned mine in Krugersdorp
in July 2022, no further arrests were made
and there was no justice for the victims and
their families. In April, the South African
Police Service (SAPS) was ordered by the
Information Regulator to apologize for leaking
personal information about the victims.2

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
Despite promises to eradicate and replace
illegal pit latrines by 2023, the Department of
Basic Education’s Education Facilities
Management report showed that 3,932
schools still used pit latrines, violating the
rights to health, dignity, safety and life.
A 2030 Reading Panel report found that
82% of Grade 4 pupils were unable to read
for meaning in any language, rising from
78% in the pre-pandemic era. The panel
consists of educational experts and civil
society members, who collate evidence about
learning and make recommendations to the
government.
The energy crisis reportedly affected access
to education, contributing to children arriving
at school late – or not at all – hungry and
unable to complete homework, increasing the
risk of entrenching existing inequalities
further.3

339

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In December, the National Council of
Provinces passed the National Health
Insurance Bill and sent it to the president for
his assent. Although it is intended to ensure
universal access to quality healthcare
services, civil society raised many concerns
that it may result in reduced access. Chief
concerns were the governance of the
National Health Insurance Fund and risk of
widespread corruption; excessive power
allocated to the minister of health; the
exclusion of asylum seekers and
undocumented migrants; and the current
crumbling state of the public healthcare
system.
Strike action in March by the National
Health Education, and Allied Workers Union
relating to wage disputes, hindered access to
healthcare services and resulted in four
deaths, according to the health minister.
Reports of the detrimental effect of South
Africa’s worsening energy crisis on access to
healthcare continued to mount. In May, the
outgoing Health Ombud (or ombudsman)
lamented the state of governance in the
health system and called for an independent
office of the health ombudsman, in line with
international best practice.

RIGHT TO WATER AND SANITATION
Department of Water and Sanitation national
reports released in June revealed a decline in
access to quality and safe drinking water. In
90 municipalities, 334 wastewater systems
were in a critical condition, and 55% of
sampled systems demonstrated poor
chemical water quality compliance.
The energy crisis placed additional strain on
already ageing and under-maintained water
infrastructure, as reported by UmgeniuThukela Water in April, resulting in water
outages or low water pressure in many areas,
and threatening the right to access safe and
sufficient water.
By 22 May, 15 people had died of cholera
in the Hammanskraal region in Gauteng
province.4 This rose to 23 people a week
later. An independent investigation by the
Water Research Commission found that

340

inadequate sanitation and hygiene
infrastructure, particularly in informal and
rural settlements, as well as operational
inefficiencies in treating wastewater and
water to acceptable standards, enabled the
rapid spread of the disease.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The vigilante group Operation Dudula
continued to curtail refugees’ and migrants’
rights, including by preventing access to
healthcare. In January, they chased foreign
nationals from the Jeppe Clinic in
Johannesburg.5
Some health facilities in Gauteng province
continued to deny access to pregnant and
lactating migrant women, and children under
six, according to Lawyers for Human Rights.
This was despite the South Gauteng High
Court ruling which upheld their right,
irrespective of nationality and documentation
status, to access free health services at all
public health facilities.
In April, after legal disputes spanning 11
years, the Department of Home Affairs
reopened the Cape Town Refugee Reception
Office.

RIGHT TO LIFE AND SECURITY OF THE
PERSON
According to the Global Initiative Against
Transnational Organized Crime, there were,
on average, reports of more than two targeted
killings a week.
In the period from July to September, police
records showed 6,945 murders, 59 fewer
compared to the same period in the previous
year. However, the murder rate remained
high, with an average of 75 people murdered
each day. During this reporting period, there
were 58 cases of mass killings, involving the
killing of three or more people in a single
incident, resulting in 218 deaths.
In September, the South Gauteng High
Court found the state liable for damages for
the torture of five prisoners in the Leeuwkop
prison in Gauteng province, for the first time
since the end of apartheid.
In July, Khayalihle Gwabuzela, also known
as Khaya Ngubane, was found guilty of the

The State of the World’s Human Rights

March 2022 killing of Ayanda Ngila, a human
rights defender and community leader of
Abahlali baseMjondolo (AbM), a shack
dwellers’ movement, and sentenced to 15
years in prison. There were no convictions for
the killing of three other AbM human rights
defenders in 2022.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
SAPS officers continued to use excessive
force, resulting in injuries and deaths.
In July, eight Presidential Protection
Services officers, who were transporting the
deputy president, were caught on video
assaulting motorists on a highway in Gauteng
province. They were granted bail in August
and their trial was rescheduled for May 2024.
UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
As of 14 February, the Independent Police
Investigative Directorate was dealing with
1,060 cases of deaths as a result of police
action.
In July, 16-year-old Karabo Chaka was killed
during a protest in Slovo Park, south of
Johannesburg. Investigations continued into
whether his killing was at the hands of police.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION
Human rights defenders, activists and
whistle-blowers continued to face threats,
intimidation and harassment. Police whistleblower Patricia Mashale, who was allegedly
dismissed after reporting suspicious activities
by SAPS officials, went into hiding after not
receiving protection. The Department of
Justice and Constitutional Development
released a Discussion Document on
Proposed Reforms for the Whistleblower
Protection Regime in South Africa for public
comment in July. In August, six men were
found guilty of murdering Gauteng
Department of Health whistle-blower Babita
Deokaran in 2021 and given prison
sentences ranging from six to 22 years.
Investigations continued to find others
suspected of being responsible for her death.
In May, the cabinet approved the General
Intelligence Laws Amendment Bill, which

The State of the World’s Human Rights

gives powers to security intelligence services
to vet anyone seeking to establish an NGO.
Journalists also continued to face threats,
attacks, intimidation and harassment,
especially through attempts to silence them
using the courts. A private prosecution by
former president Jacob Zuma against
journalist Karyn Maughan was dismissed in
June. A gag order granted to the company
Moti Group against the AmaBhungane Centre
for Investigative Journalism was set aside in
July.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Despite the government’s commitment to
reducing its carbon emissions by 2030 to
within a target range which is aligned with
limiting the global temperature increase to
1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, the
government made no progress in
decommissioning coal-fired power stations.
Civil society raised concerns that this delay
might compromise South Africa’s Just Energy
Transition Investment Plan (JET IP).
In October, the government announced that
Denmark and the Netherlands had joined the
International Group of Partners investing in
the country’s JET IP, and that further pledges
to support the transition were made by
Canada, Spain and Switzerland. At COP28 in
December, the Just Energy Transition
Implementation Plan was launched, giving
effect to the JET IP.
1. “South Africa: Amnesty International’s submission in relation to the
National Council on Gender-Based Violence and Femicide Bill [B31 –
2022]”, 18 May
2. “South Africa: Urgent measures needed to hold SAPS accountable for
denying GBV victims and their families justice”, 9 August
3. “South Africa: SONA 2023: President Cyril Ramaphosa has failed the
nation on the delivery of basic human rights”, 8 February
4. “South Africa: Authorities must act with urgency to prevent further
cholera deaths”, 22 May
5. “South Africa: Collective Voices against Health Xenophobia strongly
condemns Operation Dudula’s attack on patients at the Jeppe Clinic”,
20 January

341

SOUTH KOREA
Republic of Korea
The government adopted plans to reduce
industrial carbon emissions but failed to
pass legislation to phase out coal in energy
production. The construction of a new coalfired power plant continued. Women’s rights
were further undermined as the government
continued with controversial plans to
abolish the Ministry of Gender Equality and
Family and cut budgets aimed at preventing
and responding to violence against women.
An increasingly hard line was taken against
peaceful protesters including labour and
disability activists. The indefinite detention
of refugees and migrants was found to be
unconstitutional.

BACKGROUND
In August, tens of thousands of people
protested peacefully in the capital, Seoul,
against the release of Fukushima nuclear
wastewater by Japan into the Pacific Ocean.
In September, around 30,000 protesters took
part in a march for climate justice in Seoul.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In April, the government adopted the
National Basic Plan for Carbon Neutrality and
Green Growth that includes plans for lowering
greenhouse gas emissions and
supplementing resulting reductions in energy
production capacity with other technologies
such as nuclear power.
In June, the National Human Rights
Commission of Korea (NHRCK) submitted an
opinion to the Constitutional Court in support
of petitions contesting the constitutionality of
the government’s Carbon Neutrality Act. The
opinion stated that the greenhouse emission
reduction targets were too low and would
unjustly pass on the burden of cutting
emissions to future generations.
The Coal Phase-out bill, first proposed in
2022, that includes provisions to stop coal
power generation projects currently under
construction and to prohibit new licences,

342

was still pending at year’s end. In the
meantime, the construction of a new coalfired power station in Samcheok, Gangwon
province, continued.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The erosion of rights to freedom of
expression, association and assembly
continued against a backdrop of a
government clampdown on “illegal” protests.
In January, the city-run transport company
Seoul Metro filed a suit against the disability
advocacy group Solidarity Against Disability
Discrimination (SADD), claiming KRW
601.45 million (approximately USD 450,000)
in damages for train delays and losses
caused by SADD protests since 2021 against
lack of disabled access to trains. As part of
SADD’s campaign for improved access to
public transport for people with disabilities,
wheelchair users repeatedly boarded and
disembarked from trains to draw attention to
their calls for more spending on wheelchair
ramps, elevators at metro stations and other
mobility measures.
In September, the Constitutional Court ruled
that provisions in the National Security Law
prohibiting “anti-state”, “enemy-benefiting”
and “espionage” activities were
constitutional. The law, which has been
subject to multiple legal challenges, has been
used to silence dissent and to arbitrarily
prosecute individuals for peacefully
exercising their rights to freedom of
expression and association.
Also in September, the Constitutional Court
struck down a law that punished attempts to
send anti-Pyongyang messages, for example
leaflets carried by balloon or via cross-border
rivers, to North Korea with up to three years’
imprisonment, on the grounds that it was
inconsistent with constitutional guarantees of
freedom of expression.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Harassment of labour activists intensified in
the context of President Yoon’s anti-union
rhetoric. Police launched criminal
investigations into the activities of dozens of

The State of the World’s Human Rights

trade union members during the year and
conducted raids on union offices. A police
search and seizure operation on the office of
the Korean Construction Workers Union
(KCWU) took place on 1 May. On the same
day, KCWU executive, Yang Hoe-dong, set
fire to himself in front of the Gangneung
branch of Chuncheon District Court and died
the next day. He was under investigation in
connection with his union work, including
accusations that he had “blackmailed”
construction companies to pay union fees
and hire unionized workers.
On 31 May, police demolished a memorial
altar to Yang Hoe-dong, injuring four people,
and threatened to use pepper spray to break
up a peaceful rally organized by the Korean
Confederation of Trade Unions.

DISCRIMINATION
WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
The government continued with its
controversial plan to abolish the Ministry of
Gender Equality and Family, but had not
done so by the end of the year. In October,
the government announced significant cuts
to the 2024 budget for preventing violence
against women and supporting survivors,
provoking strong criticism from hundreds of
women’s rights organizations. On 24 August,
protests were held in Seoul demanding that
the authorities do more to end violence
against women following the murder of a
woman earlier in the month in Sillim-dong
park, in the Gwanak district of Seoul.
In August, a network of campaigners for
safe abortions lodged a petition with the
NHRCK stating that the government was
violating the right to health of women by
failing to enshrine the right to abortion into
law. In November, the UN Human Rights
Committee urged the government to take
appropriate legislative and other measures to
implement a 2019 Constitutional Court
decision which decriminalized abortion in
order to ensure effective access to safe
abortion.
LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In February, the Seoul High Court ordered
the National Health Insurance Service (NHIS)

The State of the World’s Human Rights

to resume health insurance coverage for Kim
Yong-min, as a dependent of his same-sex
partner. It was the first court ruling in South
Korea to legally recognize same-sex partners.
The ruling found that the NHIS’s spousal
insurance system was discriminatory
because it did not grant equal benefits to
people in same-sex relationships.1 The NHIS
appealed the ruling.
In May, a group of cross-party National
Assembly members tabled a marriage
equality bill to amend the civil code in order
to permit same-sex marriage. The bill was not
expected to be adopted but was regarded as
an important symbolic step in increasing
pressure on the government to expand the
definition of “family”.
In May, the NHRCK made
recommendations to the Supreme Court on
revising its rules relating to gender
recognition for trans people to ensure
compliance with human rights standards.
These had not been acted on by year’s end.
On 26 October, the Constitutional Court, for
the fourth time, upheld Article 92-6 of the
Military Criminal Act, which criminalizes
consensual same-sex sexual acts within the
Korean military.2

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
A Constitutional Court decision offered the
prospect of greater protection for refugees
and migrants in South Korea. On 23 March, it
found that the provisions of the Immigration
Control Act, including indefinite detention of
foreign nationals subject to deportation and
the absence of an independent review of
detention decisions, were unconstitutional
and violated the principles of proportionality
and due process. The Ministry of Justice said
it would challenge the ruling.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
On 23 March, the Constitutional Court found
that provisions of the Act on Registration of
Family Relations, making birth registration by
the biological father of a child born to
unmarried parents almost impossible,
violated the constitution. It confirmed that the
right to birth registration must be guaranteed

343

to all children in the country, regardless of
their nationality or status.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
On 26 January, the Ministry of Justice
rejected plans, announced earlier the same
day by the Ministry of Gender Equality and
Family, to revise the legal definition of rape
under the criminal code to include nonconsensual sex. The current definition
requires proof of “violence or intimidation”
which is inconsistent with international
standards under which lack of consent is a
fundamental element of rape.

DEATH PENALTY
Several developments raised concerns that
South Korea may be considering resuming
executions. In April, the Supreme
Prosecutor’s Office announced plans to
introduce the death penalty for infanticide
and for crimes relating to the sale and
distribution of drugs to children. In August,
the justice minister ordered correctional
institutions to inspect and carry out any
necessary maintenance of their execution
facilities.
1. “South Korea: High Court health insurance ruling offers hope for
marriage equality”, 21 February
2. “South Korea: Ruling on LGBTI soldiers a distressing setback for
human rights”, 26 October

SOUTH SUDAN
Republic of South Sudan
The rights to freedom of expression,
association, peaceful assembly and
movement were repressed. Journalists,
activists, critics and political opposition
members faced arbitrary arrest and
detention, and torture and other illtreatment. A critic of the government was
forcibly returned from Kenya and held in
prolonged detention by the National
Security Service. Government forces and
armed groups committed serious human
rights violations and abuses, including

344

extrajudicial executions, unlawful killings,
conflict-related sexual and gender-based
violence, and the recruitment and use of
children. A UN human rights body
highlighted the continuing impunity enjoyed
by senior officials responsible for serious
human rights violations. Draft bills relating
to past crimes and reparation were
approved by the Council of Ministers. The
humanitarian situation remained dire, and
OCHA estimated that about 76% of the
population needed humanitarian assistance
during the year. Millions faced high levels
of food insecurity. Health services were
mainly provided by international donors.
There were 2 million internally displaced
people, and nearly 2.23 million people had
sought refuge in neighbouring countries.
Climate change-induced events, like floods
and drought, left about 2 million people
without food or agricultural land.

BACKGROUND
In April, the UN Human Rights Council
renewed the mandate of the Commission on
Human Rights in South Sudan (CHRSS).
In May, the UN Security Council extended
the arms embargo imposed on South Sudan
for another year until 30 May 2024.
Preparations for South Sudan’s first
elections in December 2024 continued, albeit
with slow progress in completing key
prerequisites outlined in the 2018 peace
agreement for holding elections. On 4 July,
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement
endorsed President Salva Kiir as its flagbearer during the elections.
The UN said that at least 20 people died
when inter-ethnic fighting broke out in June
in the UN Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
Protection of Civilians site in Malakal, Upper
Nile State. Fighting also broke out in Pochalla
County in the Pibor Administrative Area,
resulting in at least 87 deaths.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
Between 3 and 4 January, seven South
Sudan Broadcasting Corporation journalists
were arbitrarily detained at the National

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Security Service (NSS) detention facility in
the capital Juba. Joval Tombe, Joseph Oliver,
Mustafa Osman, Victor Lado, Cherbek
Ruben, Jacob Benjamin and John Garang
were arrested in relation to a leaked video
that circulated on social media and allegedly
showed President Salva Kiir urinating on
himself during an official ceremony. They
were all released without charge between 19
January and 18 March. John Garang, who
was held until 18 March, appeared to have
been subjected to torture and other illtreatment.
During a press conference in April,
information minister and government
spokesman Michael Makuei Lueth
threatened to arrest journalists working for
the UNMISS-operated Radio Miraya,
ostensibly for defying his orders for media
houses to register with the media authority. In
October, he admitted that the government
censors the media and removes articles
deemed to incite hatred.
In May, political reporter Woja Emmanuel
announced on his social media accounts that
he had left the profession of journalism
because of fears for his life. According to a
CHRSS report of 5 October, his decision
could be attributed to the harassment of
journalists by the authorities and resulting
trauma.
On 18 September, the NSS disrupted and
shut down a gathering in Juba organized by
the South Sudan Opposition Alliance to
welcome its secretary general, Lam Akol,
back to South Sudan after spending years
abroad.

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
On 19 April, Kuel Aguer Kuel, former political
detainee and member of the People’s
Coalition for Civic Action, was prevented from
leaving the country by officials at Juba
International Airport over what they called his
“lack of authorization to travel”. His passport
was confiscated at the airport, apparently on
orders from the president’s office. He had
intended to travel to India for medical
treatment.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

On 18 September, the South Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement-In Opposition
(SPLM-IO) publicly announced that the
authorities did not allow its leader and first
vice-president Riek Machar Teny Dhurgon to
travel outside Juba.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
The government had still not amended the
2014 National Security Services Act, despite
being obliged under the 2015 and 2018
peace agreements to do so. The act granted
NSS officers police-like powers of arrest and
detention, in violation of the NSS’s
constitutional mandate to gather intelligence.
On 4 February, South Sudanese citizen and
government critic Morris Mabior Awikjok Bak
was arbitrarily arrested in Nairobi by Kenyan
security forces, and forcibly returned to Juba
the following day. At the end of the year, he
remained at an NSS detention facility known
as the Blue House, in Juba, where he was
repeatedly interrogated. He was not allowed
to see a lawyer, and was not brought before a
court. In September, it was evident that his
health was deteriorating, but he was not
allowed to see a doctor or given any
medication.
On 11 September, the SPLM-IO political
bureau met in Juba and expressed concern
over the continued arbitrary arrests,
detention, torture and other ill-treatment, and
enforced disappearances of its members.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
The UN said it documented 25 extrajudicial
executions which took place between
January and November. Of these, 17 people,
including one woman, were executed in
Warrap State and eight in Lakes State.
According to the UN, the executions were
allegedly committed by members of the
South Sudan security apparatus.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
A CHRSS report published in April
highlighted the continuing cycles of conflictrelated sexual and gender-based violence in
parts of the country. Violations were mostly
perpetrated by members of the South Sudan

345

People’s Defence Forces, the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army-In Opposition (SPLA-IO),
armed youth groups affiliated to the
government, opposition forces, and other
armed elements.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
According to the 2023 UN SecretaryGeneral’s reports on the situation in South
Sudan, grave violations against 181 children
(154 boys and 27 girls) were committed
between June and November, including the
recruitment and use of 103 children (102
boys and one girl); the killing of 24 boys and
girls, and the maiming of four boys and girls;
and the rape of one girl. The violations were
carried out by both government forces and
armed groups.

IMPUNITY
The April CHRSS report highlighted the
failure of the national leadership to address
entrenched impunity, and described how
senior public and military officials suspected
of being responsible for human rights
violations remained in post, and were even
rewarded with promotion or other
appointments, thus emboldening them and
others to commit further human rights
crimes. The report identified three senior
officials who it said should be held
accountable for serious human rights
violations.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
A survivor of conflict-related sexual violence
conveyed her message to the UN Human
Rights Council during its March session,
urging that the council ensure victims get
justice for crimes committed against them in
South Sudan.
Between 15 and 17 May, the government
convened the Conference on Transitional
Justice Mechanisms in Juba. Its objectives
included reviewing progress in the
establishment of the transitional justice
mechanisms under the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan; learning

346

from regional experiences; and building
consensus on the content and enactment of
draft bills to establish the Commission for
Truth, Reconciliation and Healing (CTRH)
and the Compensation and Reparation
Authority (CRA). In November, the CTRH and
CRA bills were approved by the Council of
Ministers, and were due to be tabled for
debate in parliament before going to the
president for his assent to their becoming
law.

DENIAL OF HUMANITARIAN ACCESS
South Sudan continued to be the deadliest
place in the world for aid workers, with at
least 25 of them killed, according to OCHA.
On 23 September, two UNICEF-contracted
trucks were attacked while returning to Juba
after delivering crucial aid supplies to
children and their families in Yei County,
Central Equatoria State. Two of the drivers
were killed and another injured.
OCHA estimated that 76% of the population
– 9.4 million, including 4.9 million children –
needed humanitarian assistance and
protection services during 2023. The
outbreak of fighting in Sudan in April
exacerbated the already severe humanitarian
situation, after 456,974 people fled the
country to seek refuge in South Sudan by the
end of the year (see below, Right to food);
80% of those fleeing were returning South
Sudanese nationals. By the end of the year,
the UN’s Humanitarian Response Plan 2023
had received only 53% of the requested USD
1.7 billion needed to provide millions of
people with life-saving assistance and
protection services.

RIGHT TO FOOD
In December, OCHA said that 5.83 million
people (46% of the population) were
experiencing high levels of food insecurity. An
estimated 35,000 people, including 6,000 in
the counties of Duk and Nyirol, Jonglei State;
15,000 in Rubkona County, Unity State; and
around 14,000 South Sudanese returnees
who fled the ongoing conflict in Sudan, faced
catastrophic hunger levels. Shortfalls in
funding for the UN’s humanitarian project

The State of the World’s Human Rights

limited resources, meaning that emergency
food assistance had to be prioritized for 3.2
million people experiencing the highest levels
of food insecurity.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Health services were mainly provided by
international donors.
The Ministry of Health confirmed measles
outbreaks in Upper Nile State on 6 June, and
in Central Equatoria and Warrap states on 20
July. Following the outbreak, the ministry and
its partners scaled up their response through
mobile clinic services for consultations,
immunization, patient referrals and delivery
of medical emergency kits.
On 16 June, according to the UN, over 150
cases of an unidentified disease were
reported – causing 23 deaths – in Darjo
Primary Health Care Unit in Longochuk
County, Upper Nile State.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S,
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
South Sudan had the largest refugee crisis in
Africa, with nearly 2.23 million people living
as refugees in neighbouring countries, the
majority in Uganda; and 2 million people
were internally displaced.
On 8 October, the government postponed a
visit to the country by the UN Special
Rapporteur on the human rights of internally
displaced persons, scheduled for 9 to 20
October. During her visit, the Special
Rapporteur had intended to gather first-hand
information on the plight of internally
displaced people; to engage with the
government and other interlocutors on the
prevention, and root causes, of internal
displacement; and to look at the needs and
human rights of the displaced, and explore
lasting solutions. The government had not
proposed new dates for her visit by the end of
the year.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
South Sudan continued to face climate
change-induced risks, including floods and
drought. It experienced its fourth consecutive
year of floods, which covered two-thirds of

The State of the World’s Human Rights

the country, and left millions without food or
agricultural land, especially in Unity and
Jonglei states. The flooding damaged shelters
and schools, destroyed crops and household
goods, reduced access to safe water and
hindered humanitarian access.
Speaking at the Africa Climate Summit in
Nairobi in September, the president said that
climate change had led to at least 2 million
people in South Sudan losing their
livelihoods.

SPAIN
Kingdom of Spain
Authorities’ violent response to attempts to
cross the border between Melilla and
Morocco in 2022 remained without
effective investigation. There was no
progress in investigations into the use of
spyware to target politicians and members
of civil society. Gender-based violence
against women and girls persisted. A law
was passed to remove barriers to abortion.
New legislation to protect the right to
housing was positive, but failed to protect
vulnerable people from evictions. Vaguely
formulated offences were misused to curb
freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly. The first case in Spain regarding
torture during the Franco era opened. Some
positive measures to tackle the climate
crisis were adopted but remained
insufficient.

BACKGROUND
In July, the government approved a National
Human Rights Plan.
Pedro Sanchez remained prime minister
following general elections in July, after
securing parliamentary agreement for an
amnesty law that could have implications for
hundreds of people, including Jordi Sànchez,
Jordi Cuixart and others prosecuted for their
involvement in the Catalan independence
movement. By year’s end, the law was
pending before parliament.

347

The Constitutional Court ruled in favour of a
2010 law to increase access to legal abortion.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In July, the UN Committee against Torture
urged the authorities to carry out an
exhaustive and independent investigation into
unlawful force used by police to repress an
attempt by a large group of people to seek
protection in Melilla, a Spanish enclave in
northern Morocco, in June 2022. At least 37
people died and hundreds more were illegally
expelled. The General Prosecutor had closed
an ongoing investigation in December 2022,
arguing that police officers had acted
according to national legislation. No one was
able to cross the border of Melilla to claim
asylum in 2023, according to official sources.
In April, a report on the 2022 visit by the
Council of Europe’s Commissioner for Human
Rights noted the lack of access to a prompt
and effective asylum procedure throughout
Spain. Many asylum seekers waited at least
six months before their first interview, during
which time they were at risk of deportation.
Unaccompanied children arriving in the
Canary Islands were detained alongside
adults and denied adequate protection.1

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In May, an investigation conducted by the
European Parliament confirmed that at least
65 people, including journalists, politicians
and members of Catalonian civil society, had
been targeted with Pegasus spyware. There
was no progress in the investigation of at
least 13 lawsuits into the use of spyware filed
in several Spanish courts.
In July, the High Court provisionally closed
the investigation into the use of Pegasus
spyware to target the prime minister, the
minister of defence and the minister of
interior due to lack of cooperation from Israeli
authorities.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Gender-based violence against women and
girls persisted, with 58 women killed by their
partners or ex-partners during the year and
13 killed by other individuals. Since 2013,

348

when records began, 50 children have been
killed in the context of gender-based violence
against their mothers, including two girls,
aged five and eight, in 2023.
By year’s end, there were only five crisis
centres for victims of sexual violence in the
whole country.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In February, a law was passed to allow 16
and 17 year-olds access to abortion services
within the public health service and without
the need for parental consent.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
In May, parliament passed the Law on the
Right to Housing, which caps rents, extends
the term during which evictions can be
suspended, and safeguards social housing
stock. Although welcome, the law did not
include sanctions to ensure rental price
controls, ban evictions for people facing
homelessness, or set annual targets to
increase social housing stock.
Temporary measures to suspend evictions
for people in economically vulnerable
situations were extended until the end of the
year. Despite this, between January and
September, there were 19,332 evictions
affecting thousands of people who fell outside
the limited criteria for eviction suspensions.
In the neighbourhood of Cañada Real, in
the capital, Madrid, 4,500 people, including
1,800 children, continued to live without
access to electricity, following disconnection
in 2020.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In March, a law protecting LGBTI people’s
rights entered into force. It guaranteed
access to health services and legal gender
recognition based on self-determination for
transgender people and prohibited
conversion therapies.
In December, Madrid’s regional parliament
passed a regressive law banning gender
recognition based on self-determination and
cut education initiatives promoting LGBTI
rights, among other measures.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

RIGHT TO HEALTH
According to official data published in 2023,
public health expenditure in 2021 had
decreased by 1.5% compared with 2020.
Eight autonomous communities also reduced
their investment in primary healthcare,
further reducing accessibility. Reporting on
her 2022 visit, the Council of Europe
Commissioner for Human Rights noted that
public healthcare facilities remained severely
understaffed and urged authorities to allocate
further financial investment into primary
healthcare.
OLDER PEOPLE
There had still been no effective investigation
into deaths and other human rights violations
in care homes during the Covid-19
pandemic, apart from a few exceptions where
progress was made by provincial prosecutors’
offices.2

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Concerns remained over the use of less lethal
weapons by various police forces in the
country. For example, in June and July, the
National Police used rubber bullets to
disperse a protest in the city of Vigo, injuring
one protester.
By the end of the year, no one had yet been
charged in relation to the death in November
2021 of a man in Barcelona who was
electroshocked several times with a Taser by
regional police, including after he had been
restrained.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
Authorities continued to misuse the Public
Security Act to excessively limit the freedom
of expression of demonstrators and
journalists. Although fewer in number than in
2022, fines continued to be issued for
vaguely defined administrative offences, such
as “showing disrespect towards a law
enforcement official” or “disobedience or
resistance to the authorities or their agents”.
By the end of the year, eight housing rights
activists were still awaiting trial for the
peaceful occupation of a bank branch to
prevent an eviction in 2017. They each faced

The State of the World’s Human Rights

prison sentences of up to 38 months and a
fine of EUR 3,600.
No investigations were launched following
media reports that undercover police officers
had infiltrated social movements using sexual
and intimate relationships as cover. The
Ministry of Interior argued that the operations
were intelligence work authorized by the
government and remained classified under
the Law on Classified Secrets.
Two separate criminal investigations for
offending religious feelings were initiated
against a journalist and a comedian for
content that was political satire or humorous,
respectively.

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
In December, the government announced
that it had suspended the issuing of new
export licences for weapons and military
equipment to Israel since October. According
to publicly available data from the first half of
the year, Spain authorized 22 arms licences
to Israel worth over EUR 44 million.

DISCRIMINATION
According to official data published during
the year, 2040 incidents of hate crime were
reported in 2022, of which 45.3% were
motivated by racism and xenophobia.

IMPUNITY
In September, for the first time regarding a
victim of torture during the Franco
dictatorship, Julio Pacheco testified as a
complainant before a Spanish judge. He
provided details of his detention and torture
at the former General Directorate of Security
in Madrid in 1975. His wife Rosa García
Alcón, who was also detained and tortured,
appeared as a witness.
In October, a judge closed the investigation
into a complaint filed by Carles Vallejo that he
had been tortured in the police station of Via
Laietana in Barcelona between 1979 and
1980. An appeal was filed.
A proposed amnesty bill contained some
concerning provisions, including that it could
cover cases of excessive use of force by the

349

police and would not adequately protect the
rights of victims of crimes.3

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Spain registered its third warmest summer on
record and the Carlos III Health Institute
estimated that 6,799 deaths between
January and September were attributable to
the heat. Heatwaves combined with longterm drought conditions, exacerbated by
global warming, increased the intensity and
spread of wildfires, resulting in the burning of
84,939 hectares.
An updated draft of the National Integrated
Climate and Energy Plan included a planned
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions,
compared with 1990, of up to 32% by 2030.
This was far below the 43% reduction
previously announced by the government.
In June, the Supreme Court ruled in favour
of the government, which had been sued in
2021 for failing to take adequate action on
climate change. The ruling failed to consider
Spain’s international human rights obligations
and the urgent need to increase action on
climate change.
1. “Spain: Canary Islands/ New investigation: Boys and girls travelling
alone detained with adults and with their belongings confiscated”, 3
November (Spanish only)
2. “Spain: Care homes: After the deaths of 35,000 elderly people,
victims and relatives have only received opacity from the Prosecutor's
Office and absence of justice in the courts”, 25 January (Spanish
only)
3. “Spain: Amnesty International calls for the rights of victims of
human rights violations and crimes to be guaranteed in the Amnesty
Law and for it to comply with international law”, 28 December
(Spanish only)

SRI LANKA
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
The economic crisis doubled the number of
people living below the poverty line. The
government continued to use draconian
counterterror laws and attempted to bring in
new laws to counter dissent and threaten
freedom of expression, resulting in arbitrary
arrests and detentions. The right to freedom

350

of peaceful assembly was restricted amid
continued use of excessive and unnecessary
force against protesters. Impunity remained
entrenched with the government making no
notable progress around the right to truth,
justice and reparation for those affected by
war. Legislative reforms to decriminalize
consensual same-sex relations and to end
child marriages within the Muslim
community did not come to fruition.

BACKGROUND
The World Bank reported the number of
people living below the poverty line had
doubled since 2022 and was expected to
increase to over 2.2 million (27.5%) in 2023.
Sri Lanka received the first USD 330 million
tranche of the IMF bailout in March. The
second, of USD 337 million, was cleared in
December to help with the economic crisis.
In its response to its UPR in March, Sri
Lanka merely noted – and did not support –
most recommendations made during the
UPR on accountability for war-time serious
violations of human rights and humanitarian
law.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
The economic crisis particularly affected
marginalized groups who had to contend with
loss of income, growing inflation and
inadequate social protection measures.1
According to the IMF Country Report
released in March, only 0.6% of GDP was to
be spent on social protection in 2023.
Despite the introduction of a new
“Aswesuma” welfare benefit payment
scheme, the narrowly targeted programme
meant that only approximately 1.1 of the 2
million families living below the poverty line
were eligible. The scheme risked excluding
many of the people most affected by
economic crisis, including those living in
urban areas, working in the informal sector,
on daily wage incomes, from the Malaiyaha
Tamil community, others with low or
precarious incomes, and those whose
incomes were lost due to unemployment.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Pregnant and breastfeeding women were
disproportionately impacted by the economic
crisis. They faced increased food insecurity,
including as a result of an inconsistent supply
of government-issued maternal nutrition, food
and vitamin supplements, and
because essential maternal health services
were severely affected.2

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION, ARBITRARY
ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
The government sought to replace the
draconian Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA)
with the Anti-Terrorism Act (ATA). The first
bill, gazetted in March, contained overly
broad, vague and subjective offences, posing
high risk of arbitrary application and abuse,
including new offences categorizing acts of
civil disobedience as terror offences. In
September, a new ATA bill was gazetted with
minor changes but the legislation’s capacity
to enable human rights violations remained.
The PTA remained in use throughout 2023.
In August 2022, the convener of the Inter
University Students Federation, Wasantha
Mudalige, was arrested amid a crackdown on
protesters agitating against and seeking
accountability for the dire economic crisis. In
January 2023, the Colombo Chief Magistrate
ruled that the terrorism-related charges
under the PTA could not be maintained
against Wasantha Mudalige, and he was
released. Despite assurances to the
international community that the PTA would
be abolished, in May authorities brought PTA
charges against four people in connection
with the 21 April 2019 bombings. By June,
all had their PTA charges dismissed, and two
were charged instead under Sri Lanka’s
International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights Act (ICCPR Act). In November,
authorities arrested nine individuals under
the PTA for a commemoration vigil in the
eastern town of Batticaloa. In December, poet
and teacher Ahnaf Jazeem was acquitted by
the Puttalam High Court, over three and a
half years after he was wrongly detained
under the PTA.
The ICCPR Act was weaponized once more
against freedom of expression. In January,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

authorities arrested social media
commentator Sepal Amarasinghe for
comments made on YouTube deemed
offensive to Buddhism. He was only released
following an unconditional public apology in
February. In May, authorities arrested
comedian Nathasha Edirisooriya for
comments made during a stand-up comedy
show that were allegedly disrespectful of
Buddhism. Bruno Divakara, who runs a
YouTube channel that published Nathasha
Edirisooriya’s performance, was also arrested
a few days later. They were both given bail in
July; the cases against them remained
pending.
In September, the government gazetted a
bill to regulate online communication and
safety. The OHCHR noted that “many
sections of the Bill contain vaguely defined
terms and definitions of offences which leave
significant room for arbitrary and subjective
interpretation and could potentially
criminalize nearly all forms of legitimate
expression, creating an environment that has
a chilling effect on freedom of expression”.
In December, authorities began an
operation titled “Yukthiya”, with the stated
aim of controlling “the drug menace”. The
operation saw hundreds arrested daily.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
Following large-scale public protests in 2022
that ousted the ruling party elite from power,
there were crackdowns on protests
throughout 2023, stifling the right to peaceful
assembly, including for trade unions, civil
society and students’ groups.
Amnesty International found that authorities
had approached the judiciary to obtain preemptive court orders preventing protests;
systematically misused weapons such as tear
gas, water cannons and batons; used military
to police protests; and applied excessive and
unnecessary force as well as surveillance and
intimidation. In February, one protester was
killed and dozens injured due to the unlawful
use of water cannons and tear gas by police
in the capital, Colombo.

351

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATIONS
In September, nine international human
rights organizations criticized the
government’s flawed plans for a “Truth
Commission”. Given the failure of domestic
commissions of inquiry to ensure
accountability, some victim communities
rejected the plans outright. Others
highlighted the need for trust-building
measures prior to the establishment of any
truth commission, noting concerns around
continuing surveillance and the lack of space
for memorialization.3
Other domestic transitional justice
mechanisms (the Office on Reparations and
the Office on Missing Persons) made no
notable progress over the year according to
publicly available information. Many cases –
exemplars of impunity for human rights
violations – dragged on in the domestic court
system, again with no notable progress.
The Sri Lanka Accountability Project that
was established in 2021 under the OHCHR
reported in June that it received a steady
increase in requests from competent state
authorities in several jurisdictions who have
ongoing criminal justice investigations,
including in relation to 10 named individuals
to date. The government rejected the
mechanism.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In March, government MP Premnath
Dolawatte moved a Private Members’ bill to
amend the Penal Code to protect the rights of
LGBTI individuals by repealing provisions
criminalizing consensual same-sex relations.
Following multiple legal challenges, the
Supreme Court determined that the bill is in
line with the constitution. However, the broad
support needed for the bill to be passed into
law remained elusive and the bill was not
tabled in parliament by the end of the year.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
The government made no progress to amend
the Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act of 1951
which, among other issues, permits child
marriage of those aged as young as 12. In

352

June, male Muslim MPs stalled the reform
process, resulting in criticism from a number
of UN Special Procedures mandate holders.
Their communication to the Sri Lankan
government noted “if recommendations put
forward by the 17 Muslim MPs were to be
introduced into the Draft Bill, it would be
contrary to international standards and
obligations on the protection of women’s
rights”.
The government adopted its first National
Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security
for the period 2023 – 2027 and announced
plans to establish a National Women’s
Commission.
1. Actions Speak Louder than Words: The World Bank Must Promote
Universal Social Protection, 10 October
2. Sri Lanka: Foregoing meals to make do: The Impact of Sri Lanka’s
economic crisis on maternal nutrition, 12 July
3. “Sri Lanka’s Flawed Plans for a ‘Truth Commission’” 4 September

SUDAN
Republic of the Sudan
Armed conflict between the Sudan Armed
Forces, and the Rapid Support Forces with
their allied militias, caused mass civilian
casualties in deliberate and indiscriminate
attacks. All parties to the conflict
committed serious violations and abuses of
international human rights law, and
violations of international humanitarian law.
Women and girls were subjected to conflictrelated sexual violence. Impunity remained
at the heart of the conflict-related violations
and abuses. Millions of people were
internally displaced and about 1.4 million
fled to neighbouring countries and lived in
dire conditions.

BACKGROUND
In April, intense armed clashes erupted
between the Sudan Armed Forces (SAF), led
by General Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, and the
Rapid Support Forces (RSF) paramilitaries,
led by General Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo
(also known as Hemedti), in the capital,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Khartoum. The clashes quickly spread to
other areas, including Darfur and North
Kordofan. The fighting came after months of
tensions between the two groups over
security force reforms, proposed as part of
the negotiations for a new transitional
government, among other issues.
Despite multiple ceasefire declarations,
fighting intensified. According to the UN,
more than 12,000 people were killed
between April and December nationwide. In
October, it was reported that about 15 million
people – 31% of the population – were
acutely food insecure.
Fighters, mostly RSF, engaged in
widespread looting of homes, businesses and
public institutions, including hospitals,
humanitarian organizations’ warehouses, and
banks in Khartoum and in the Darfur region.
Meanwhile, the 20-year-old Darfur conflict
continued to cause immense suffering in the
region.

On 18 May, Khadija Mustafa Osman Said,
her sons, Haydar Hamed Guma Khater and
Hameid Hamed Guma Khater, and their
neighbour, Mustafa Ali Hamdan, were killed
when munitions hit their house in the Imtidad
neighbourhood, near the centre of Nyala,
South Darfur.
On 21 May, at least seven people were
killed and 12 injured in one strike on the
Ministry of Agriculture, in the northern part of
the al-Jamarik neighbourhood of El Geneina
in West Darfur, where many residents had
taken refuge after leaving their homes.
On 14 June, dozens of civilians were killed
and injured, including Gamra Mustafa, who
was hit by two bullets while inside her home
in the al-Madaris neighbourhood of El
Geneina. On the same day, in the nearby
neighbourhood of Hay al-Riadh, seven-yearold Adnan Is’haq was killed inside his home
by a stray bullet which struck him in the
chest.

INDISCRIMINATE ATTACKS

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS

Many civilians were caught in the crossfire as
members of the SAF and RSF, often using
explosive weapons with wide area effects,
launched frequent attacks in and from
densely populated civilian neighbourhoods.
People were consequently killed inside their
homes, or while desperately searching for
food and other necessities. Others were killed
and injured while fleeing from the violence,
and in places where they had sought safety.
In most cases, it was difficult to establish
which side fired the munitions that killed and
injured civilians.1
On 15 April, the day clashes erupted, Ala’
Fawzi al-Mardi, a doctor, was killed and her
mother, Zeinab Ahmad Othman, injured by a
stray bullet, in their home in Hay al-Manara
in Omdurman.
On 24 April, Suhair Abdallah al-Bashir, a
lawyer, and her two brothers-in-law,
Mohammed and Omar al-Rayeh, were killed
by explosive ordnance. The munitions struck
near their vehicle as they were leaving their
home in the centre of Khartoum, near the
foreign affairs ministry.

Civilians were killed and injured in targeted
attacks in many parts of the country
including Khartoum, but particularly in West
Darfur.
On 13 May, RSF members broke into the
Mar Girgis (St Georges) Coptic Church
complex in the Bahri area of Khartoum. They
shot and injured five members of the clergy
and stole money and a gold cross.
On 19 May, Peter Kiano, a 60-year-old
maths and engineering teacher from South
Sudan, who had lived and worked in
Khartoum for many years, was shot dead by
RSF soldiers outside a restaurant, in the
southern outskirts of Khartoum.
Tensions increased in Darfur, and towns,
cities and villages in West Darfur including El
Geneina, Misterei and Tandelti were attacked
by heavily armed Arab militias, supported by
RSF fighters. Many ethnic Masalit people,
mostly men and older boys, were deliberately
killed and injured in ethnically motivated
attacks.
On 25 April, Ibrahim Adam Mohamed and
his brother Mohamed, were shot and injured
by Arab militia members while sitting outside

The State of the World’s Human Rights

353

their home in the Bouhaira neighbourhood of
El Geneina.
On 14 May, Adam Zakaria Is’haq, a medical
doctor and human rights defender who
worked with the Darfur Network for Human
Rights, was killed together with 13 other
people at the Medical Rescue Centre, a
health clinic in the Jamarik neighbourhood of
El Geneina.
On 17 May, farmers Abderrahman Ibrahim
Ahmed and Ali Is’haq Ali Bashir were
deliberately shot and killed by Arab militia
fighters in Tandelti, north-west of El Geneina,
close to the Chadian border. Five other
civilians, including Mariam Mohamed Ahmad
and her cousin Hassan Ibrahim were killed in
the same incident.
On 28 May, dozens of civilians were killed in
Misterei, a town south-west of El Geneina,
when clashes broke out between RSF and
allied militias, and Masalit armed groups.
RSF fighters killed five brothers inside their
home.
On 14 June, the governor of West Darfur,
Khamis Abakar, also the leader of the
Sudanese Alliance armed group, was killed in
El Geneina. He had been taken into custody
by RSF fighters earlier that day.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Scores of women and girls, some as young as
12, were subjected to conflict-related sexual
violence, including rape, by members of the
warring sides, mainly RSF and allied militias.
Most of the survivors were Sudanese, and
some were nationals of other countries. They
were abducted and subjected to sexual
violence in their homes or when they went
out to look for food or other necessities. In
one case, RSF members abducted a group of
24 women and girls and took them to a hotel
in Nyala where they were held in conditions
amounting to sexual slavery for several days
during which they were raped by several RSF
members.
In another case, on 22 June, three plainclothes armed Arab men assaulted a 25-yearold woman and forced her into the civil
records building in the al-Jamarik

354

neighbourhood of El Geneina, where they
gang-raped her.
Many survivors had no access to necessary
medical and psycho-social support because
of the limited protection, rehabilitation and
livelihood services available to them. Many
health facilities had been damaged and
looted in the conflict, and medical personnel
had fled. Time-sensitive post-rape care was
limited or non-existent; survivors were unable
or too afraid to report assaults and seek
medical care. In addition, communication
networks were weak or cut off in some areas
and movement was severely restricted by the
conflict.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In July, the ICC Prosecutor said his office had
started investigating recent attacks in Darfur.
Three people, including former president
Omar al-Bashir, who faced ICC charges were
still to be handed over to the ICC for trial.
On 11 October, the UN Human Rights
Council adopted a resolution that established
an independent international fact-finding
mission for Sudan. The mechanism was
mandated to investigate and establish the
facts, circumstances and root causes of all
alleged human rights violations and abuses,
and violations of international humanitarian
law, including those committed against
refugees, and related crimes in the context of
the ongoing armed conflict.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S
RIGHTS
The conflict was devastating for civilians and
the situation continued to deteriorate. Over
5.8 million people were internally displaced
since April, making Sudan the scene of the
largest displacement crisis in the world. Over
4.5 million of these were displaced between
15 April and 19 October alone, according to
the UN. Among those displaced were
refugees from other countries, especially
Ethiopia, Eritrea and South Sudan, who had
sought refuge in Sudan. The humanitarian
crisis faced by internally displaced people
was exacerbated by acute shortages of food,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

water, medicines and fuel. The price of
essential goods increased dramatically due to
disrupted trade routes and limited access,
making them unaffordable to the population.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Since 15 April, about 1.4 million had fled to
neighbouring Central African Republic, Chad,
Egypt, Ethiopia and South Sudan, where they
lived in dire conditions. The situation was
exacerbated for some asylum seekers when
they were denied entry to some countries,
putting them at risk of return to the dangers
they had tried to escape. The Egyptian
authorities required all Sudanese nationals to
obtain an entry visa issued by the Egyptian
consular office in the Sudanese cities of Wadi
Halfa or Port Sudan.2 On 29 May, Egypt also
introduced the additional requirement of
security clearance for boys and men aged
between 16 and 50 before they could enter
Egypt (see Egypt entry).
1. Sudan: “Death came to our home”: War crimes and civilian suffering
in Sudan, 3 August
2. “Sudan: Neighbouring countries must provide safe passage to those
fleeing conflict” 5 July

SWEDEN
Kingdom of Sweden
Civil disobedience activists continued to be
subjected to harsh charges and sanctions.
Sweden failed to take adequate action to
decarbonize its economy. Access to
healthcare continued to be an issue for
vulnerable EU migrants. National legislation
remained inadequate to protect Indigenous
rights, such as to lands and free, prior and
informed consent. Several legislative
proposals targeted the rights of racialized
communities, migrants and refugees.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Climate activists carrying out peaceful acts of
civil disobedience continued to face harsh
charges of sabotage, an offence punishable

The State of the World’s Human Rights

by imprisonment not used prior to 2022.
Several activists were convicted of this
offence, including one imprisoned in 2023.
In a response to numerous burnings of the
Qur’an in 2023, the government announced
it would review the Public Order Act to
include threats to security when considering
whether to grant a permit for a
demonstration, or to cancel or disperse a
public gathering. In October, for the first time,
the district court of Linköping convicted a
person of inciting racial hatred for burning a
copy of the Qur’an.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Sweden failed to raise its climate ambition or
to take adequate steps to phase out fossil
fuels. According to the government’s own
assessment, Sweden was on course to miss
its short- and long-term environmental goals
following the September climate budget,
which made fossil fuels cheaper and slowed
the renewable energy transition. In
December, the government presented its
four-year Climate Action Plan, which led to
broad concerns about increased emissions
and Sweden’s climate policy continuing to
regress.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Access to healthcare continued to be an
issue for EU migrants living in destitution in
Sweden, amid concerns that EU migrant
parents were being billed for their children’s
healthcare in breach of both national law and
international obligations. In June, Amnesty
International and Médecins du Monde –
International submitted a collective complaint
to the European Committee of Social Rights
concerning EU migrants’ right to health and
non-discrimination.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
A parliamentary inquiry into Sámi hunting
and fishing rights progressed with the
publication of an interim report in August.
Concerns remained, however, about pressure
on the Sámi traditional territory from
extractive industries, as well as by renewable
energy projects and climate change. National

355

legislation remained inadequate to protect
Indigenous rights, such as to lands and free,
prior and informed consent.

DISCRIMINATION
Despite the national action plan to combat
racism, several criminal justice measures
aimed at combating crime risked
discriminating against and violating the rights
of racialized communities, refugees and
migrants. New legislation extending the
possible use of secret coercive measures
such as digital surveillance, telephone
tapping and data interception raised
concerns that they would be used
disproportionately against such groups. Other
government initiatives risked amplifying
racially discriminatory policing and systemic
racial discrimination if adopted, such as a
proposal to compel public servants to report
undocumented people, including children, to
the Migration Agency and police.

SWITZERLAND
Swiss Confederation
The law on rape was amended to punish sex
perpetrated against a person’s consent.
Parliament failed to fully decriminalize
abortion. A new initiative put the rights of
people with disabilities on the agenda.
Peaceful protesters in several cantons faced
disproportionate restrictions by police and
cantonal authorities. Work continued on a
definition of torture in the Criminal Code.
Refugees and migrants continued to lack
support and protection. A large majority
voted to strengthen measures against
climate change. Automatic facial
recognition was banned in several cities.

BACKGROUND
In May, after 20 years of preparation, the
Swiss Human Rights Institution was formally
established. However, there were concerns
about inadequate funding and the lack of a
mandate to receive complaints.

356

Switzerland underwent several international
human rights reviews. In the UPR,
Switzerland remained unwilling to invest
properly in a standing inter-agency
mechanism to coordinate the implementation
of international human rights obligations, or
to commit to ensuring that popular initiatives
were fully compatible with international
human rights law before being submitted to a
vote.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Parliament adopted an amendment to the
Criminal Code changing the definition of
rape, recognizing that “sex against the will of
another person” is rape. The adoption of the
law, expected to enter into force in 2024,
marked the end of the outdated definition of
rape that required the use of physical force,
threat or coercion, and considered only
women as victims.
Parliament also called for the creation of
crisis centres for survivors of gender-based
violence in all cantons, and commissioned a
study to evaluate the obstacles survivors face
when seeking justice.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
The lower house of parliament rejected by a
small majority a parliamentary initiative aimed
at fully decriminalizing abortion.

RIGHTS OF PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
Following concerns expressed in 2022 by the
UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, a popular “inclusion initiative”
was launched to seek legal and effective
equality for people with disabilities.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
A system requiring authorization for public
assembly remained in force. Unauthorized
peaceful protests were dispersed by force,
including in the cities of Basel and Geneva.
In the cantons of Zurich and Basel-Stadt,
the youth wing of a right-wing party launched
a popular initiative seeking to further
entrench the requirement for demonstrations
to be authorized, and to introduce a
mandatory financial liability for organizers.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Despite opposition in the cantonal
parliament, the initiative in Zurich was due to
be put to a vote on 3 March 2024.
Since the beginning of the current armed
conflict in Gaza, several German-speaking
cities in Switzerland imposed temporary bans
on demonstrations.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The UN Committee against Torture reviewed
Switzerland, asking for swift progress on the
definition of torture in the Criminal Code, on
which parliamentary work was ongoing. This
included strengthening the national
preventive mechanism and setting up an
independent mechanism in every canton to
investigate and prosecute allegations of
police violence and violence against people in
detention.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The European Court of Human Rights
criticized Switzerland for rejecting family
reunification applications by refugees on the
grounds that they were dependent on social
assistance. Switzerland continued
transferring people to Croatia – including
those with health problems or suffering from
trauma – despite evidence of summary
returns and serious flaws in the Croatian
asylum system. Switzerland’s resettlement
programme remained suspended, depriving
refugees of a regular and safe pathway to
protection. A state-mandated study identified
a need to improve medical care for asylum
seekers in federal and cantonal
accommodation. The National Commission
for the Prevention of Torture expressed
concern about the inadequate care of
unaccompanied minors in federal asylum
centres.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
In a referendum in June, 59% of voters
confirmed a new climate law aimed at
accelerating the shift from fossil fuels to
renewable energy and reducing the negative
climate impact of the financial sector.
Although Amnesty International supported

The State of the World’s Human Rights

the law, the measures were insufficient to
rapidly phase out all fossil fuels by 2030.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
After campaigning by Amnesty International
and other NGOs, parliamentary initiatives in
eight cities and cantons demanded the
banning of automatic facial recognition in
public spaces. In the cities of Zurich, St.
Gallen and Lausanne, and the canton of
Basel-Stadt, parliaments adopted motions for
a ban on facial recognition, while similar
motions were in progress in the cities of
Lucerne and Geneva and in the cantons of
Zurich and Basel-Landschaft. In a national
survey, 78% of parliamentary candidates
supported such a ban.

SYRIA
Syrian Arab Republic
All parties to the long-standing conflict and
their allies continued to carry out unlawful
attacks, killing civilians and destroying vital
infrastructure. Türkiye-backed armed groups
unlawfully killed four civilians. The
government and armed groups denied
civilians access to humanitarian aid. The
government continued to subject tens of
thousands of people to enforced
disappearance; the UN General Assembly
established an international institution to
clarify the fate of missing people and
provide reparation to families of victims.
The government and armed forces arbitrarily
detained individuals for expressing their
views. Refugees remained at risk of arrest
upon return to Syria. The government
continued to prevent residents and
internally displaced people in north-west
Syria from accessing essential services,
violating their economic and social rights.
The government violated the right to
housing of residents in Aleppo city whose
homes were affected by powerful
earthquakes on 6 February. The Israeli
military violently quelled protests against
the installation of turbines in the Golan

357

Heights, a Syrian area occupied by Israel
for 56 years.

BACKGROUND
On 27 January, the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons concluded
that there are “reasonable grounds to
believe” that the Syrian government used
chemical weapons in attacks on 7 April 2018
in Douma, a city in Damascus Countryside
Governorate.
On 6 February, two earthquakes struck
south-eastern Türkiye and northern Syria with
a magnitude of 7.8 and 7.5, respectively. The
UN estimated that at least 6,000 people in
Syria were killed, 400,000 families were
displaced and over 8.8 million people were in
urgent need of assistance. The earthquakes
compounded dire economic conditions as
more than half of the population was already
food insecure.
On 7 May, the Arab League reinstated
Syria’s membership after its suspension in
November 2011 for its brutal crackdown on
peaceful protests.
On 27 August, the Syrian Democratic
Forces (SDF), the military force of the
Autonomous Administration of North and
East Syria (AANES), arrested Ahmad alKhabil, head of the military council in Deir ezZor city, for allegedly communicating with the
Syrian government. His arrest triggered
armed clashes between SDF forces and Arab
tribes affiliated with Ahmad al-Khabil, which
displaced at least 50,000 people to
government-controlled areas.
In September, thousands of people in
Sweida, a Druze-majority city in south-west
Syria, protested the deteriorating economic
conditions, calling for “regime” change.
Israel continued its air strikes on Syrian
government, Iranian and (Lebanese)
Hizbullah forces in Syria. On 12 October, in
the context of the armed conflict in Gaza (see
Israel and the Occupied Palestinian
Territories, and Palestine entries), Israel
attacked by air Aleppo and Damascus
international airports simultaneously. Three
days later, pro-government forces launched
rockets on the occupied Golan Heights.

358

By the end of 2023, 5.6 million Syrians had
sought refuge outside the country since the
conflict began in 2011.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS
All parties to the conflict and their allies
continued to conduct unlawful ground and
aerial attacks on civilians and civilian objects
in northern Syria, killing and injuring scores
of civilians and destroying vital infrastructure
indispensable for their survival.
SYRIAN GOVERNMENT AND ITS ALLY RUSSIA
The Syrian government, supported by
Russian government forces, escalated aerial
attacks on civilians and civilian objects in
north-west Syria, a region under the control
of armed opposition groups, between October
and December. According to the UN, as of
21 December, these attacks had killed 99
civilians and injured over 400 others. The UN
added that 23 health facilities and 17 schools
were damaged.
Prior to this escalation, the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the
Syrian Arab Republic (UN Commission of
Inquiry) reported that the Syrian government
had launched multiple unlawful ground
attacks in north-west Syria. On 9 April,
government forces shelled the densely
populated centre of Sarmin town, east of Idlib
city and around 5km from the nearest front
line, killing a 13-year-old boy and injuring
three other children who were playing
outside. On 22 June, government forces
launched two unguided rockets on Sarmin
town, killing one woman and injuring a boy
and four women.
The UN Commission of Inquiry also
documented an air strike by Russian armed
forces at 10am on 25 June on a residential
building that the commission said was
possibly used by an armed group, adjacent to
a vegetable market in Jisr al-Shughur city in
Idlib governorate, killing three civilians and
injuring 34 others.
TÜRKIYE
According to the UN Commission of Inquiry,
on 18 January, a “likely Turkish guided air-toground missile” fired from a drone struck a
pickup truck driving past a supermarket on

The State of the World’s Human Rights

the Qamishli-Malkiyah road in Hassake
governorate in north-east Syria, which is
under the control of AANES, a staunch
opponent of Türkiye and the Syrian National
Army (SNA), a coalition of Türkiye-backed
armed groups. The attack killed a man and
an 11-year-old boy and injured several
people who were in the supermarket.
Türkiye further intensified aerial attacks on
north-east Syria after the Kurdistan Workers
Party (PKK) carried out a bomb attack on 1
October in Ankara, capital of Türkiye, which
wounded two police officers. On 7 October,
Turkish authorities said that 58 Kurdish
fighters in north-east Syria had been killed in
air strikes since the bomb attack. Kurdish
authorities who govern north-east Syria
reported that Turkish strikes on 5 and 6
October, which were in the vicinity of a
displacement camp and several villages,
killed 11 civilians and targeted at least three
oil plants, two power stations, two hospitals
and a school. The local authorities said the
air strikes also caused power cuts affecting
tens of thousands of residents in Hassake
and Qamishli cities.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
On 20 March, SNA members shot a Kurdish
family in Jinderes town in northern Syria as
they were celebrating Newroz, the Kurdish
New Year. They killed four civilians and
injured three others. The next day, the SNA
arrested four armed fighters allegedly
responsible for the attack but failed to
disclose the outcome of their trial or whether
victims and their families were provided with
reparation.

DENIAL OF HUMANITARIAN ACCESS
The Syrian government and SNA blocked
access to humanitarian aid, including
earthquake aid, in Aleppo governorate.
SYRIAN GOVERNMENT
The authorities continued to restrict fuel and
other essential supplies, including flour and
medication, from reaching tens of thousands
of civilians, including internally displaced
people, living in predominantly Kurdish areas
in the northern Aleppo region controlled by

The State of the World’s Human Rights

the Kurdish civilian council, affiliated with the
AANES. During harsh weather, people
burned household items and plastic to keep
warm.
Following the 6 February earthquakes, the
authorities delayed aid deliveries to Sheikh
Maksoud and Ashrafieh, two Kurdish-majority
neighbourhoods in the north of Aleppo city,
which exacerbated the humanitarian crisis. A
humanitarian worker and local representative
in north-east Syria told Amnesty International
that it took seven days of negotiations for the
government to allow 100 trucks carrying fuel
and humanitarian aid sent by AANES to enter
Sheikh Maksoud and Ashrafieh on 16
February, and only then on condition that
they divert more than half of the aid to the
government and that the government would
be solely responsible for distributing the aid
in these neighbourhoods.
The government continued to block the
entry of aid to 8,000 people living in Rukban
camp, an informal settlement located in an
isolated and inhospitable area between the
Syria-Jordan border known as “the berm”.
Residents lacked access to medical care,
sanitation and clean water. On 20 June, the
US military, based near Rukban camp,
delivered essential supplies sent by USbased humanitarian organizations.
SYRIAN NATIONAL ARMY
SNA armed groups supported by Türkiye
obstructed aid from reaching people affected
by the earthquakes in Afrin district in Aleppo
governorate, shot in the air to disperse
crowds trying to obtain assistance from aid
trucks, and diverted earthquake aid to the
armed groups’ relatives.1
Four people interviewed by Amnesty
International confirmed that the SNA
obstructed at least 30 fuel and other trucks
carrying humanitarian aid sent by AANES
from reaching areas under SNA control. The
trucks waited at the border crossing between
north-east Syria and northern Aleppo for
seven days before AANES retrieved them. A
Kurdish man whose home in a village in Afrin
district was destroyed in the earthquake told
Amnesty International that people needed
wasta (connections) with armed groups to

359

obtain any assistance, and that no one had
arrived to help them.

a week in Idlib in January after he criticized
religious speeches.

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND ENFORCED
DISAPPEARANCES

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION

SYRIAN GOVERNMENT
The government continued to subject tens of
thousands of people, including journalists,
human rights defenders, lawyers and political
activists, to enforced disappearance, many
for more than 10 years.
According to the UN Commission of Inquiry,
government forces continued to arbitrarily
arrest and detain individuals, including
“through application of the cybercrime law to
stifle criticism of government services or
policy.”
On 23 March, security forces arrested Rami
Viatli, an activist, in Latakia governorate.
Local sources said that his arrest was
believed to be in response to his post on
Facebook on 12 March in which he called on
the authorities to hold torturers accountable.
On 5 September, the authorities arrested
Lama Abbas, a political activist, without an
arrest warrant. Two days earlier, she had
used social media to call on people living in
Latakia not to sell their land.
In April, Syrian security forces arrested at
least six refugees who had been deported by
the Lebanese authorities. Two former
detainees told Amnesty International that
Syrian security forces held them at a
detention facility close to the Lebanese
border, and they were only released after
paying a bribe. They added that security
forces transferred two of the arrested
refugees to the Palestine branch of Syria’s
military intelligence in Damascus for
defecting from the army.
HAY’AT TAHRIR AL-SHAM
Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham, an al-Qaeda-affiliated
armed group that controls much of Idlib
governorate, continued to subject journalists,
activists and anyone who criticized their rule
to arbitrary detention without access to a
lawyer or family members.
The UN Commission of Inquiry reported
that Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham detained a man for

On 29 June, the UN General Assembly
established an independent, international
institution to clarify the fate and whereabouts
of the tens of thousands of missing and
forcibly disappeared people in Syria since
2011 and provide reparation to their families.
On 8 September, a criminal court in
France’s capital Paris announced that it will
try in their absence three Syrian senior
security officials accused of complicity in war
crimes and crimes against humanity. The
trials will be held in May 2024.
On 10 October, the International Court of
Justice (also known as the World Court) held
the first public session in the case submitted
by Canada and the Netherlands alleging that
the Syrian government was violating the
UN Convention against Torture. On 16
November, the court issued an order
directing Syrian authorities to take all
measures to prevent acts of torture and other
detention-related abuses.
On 15 November, French judges issued
international arrest warrants for Syria’s
President Bashar al-Assad, his brother Maher
al-Assad and two other senior officials on
charges of complicity in crimes against
humanity and war crimes over the use of
banned chemical weapons against civilians in
Eastern Ghouta in Damascus Countryside in
August 2013, which killed 1,000 people.

360

ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL RIGHTS
Around 4.4 million people in north-west
Syria, including 2.9 million internally
displaced people, continued to depend fully
for their survival on UN-coordinated
humanitarian assistance provided through
the cross-border aid mechanism. Russia
ended the cross-border mechanism on 11
July after it vetoed a UN Security Council
resolution for its extension. On 9 August, the
Syrian government reached an agreement
with the UN to continue cross-border aid
until mid-January 2024.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

The 6 February earthquakes exacerbated
the humanitarian needs of residents in northwest Syria, including the increased number
of people living in tents that offered minimal
privacy or protection from extreme heat, cold
or rain, with limited or no access to water,
sanitation and healthcare.
RIGHT TO HOUSING
Residents and humanitarian workers in
Aleppo city reported that assessments
conducted by engineering committees,
formed by the authorities to assess the
structural safety of buildings, might not have
been done meticulously and that the
demolitions carried out after the 6 February
earthquakes did not comply with due process
requirements and safeguards against forced
evictions as described in international human
rights standards.2 Residents were unable to
challenge the committees’ decisions and
were often not given enough time to remove
their belongings before demolitions. In some
cases, residents whose homes were
demolished because they were deemed
unsafe for habitation were not offered
alternative housing or compensation. In
addition, residents seeking to repair their
homes damaged by the earthquakes faced
bureaucratic obstacles.

OCCUPIED GOLAN HEIGHTS
The Golan Heights remained under Israel’s
occupation and illegal annexation. On 22
June, Israeli forces responded violently to
quell protests by the Syrian Druze
community, a religious minority, against the
construction of wind turbines in the area.
According to media sources, 20 protesters
were injured.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Syria continued to face a multi-year drought
due to increased temperatures driven by
climate change and exacerbated by other
factors, including water management failures.
Damage, destruction and neglect of key
water sites and infrastructure by warring
parties during the conflict, as well as
continued obstruction of aid, further

The State of the World’s Human Rights

exacerbated the impact of droughts on
people in Syria.
1. “Syria: Vital earthquake aid blocked or diverted in Aleppo’s desperate
hour of need,” 6 March
2. “Syria: Aleppo authorities must ensure that building safety measures
do not result in forced evictions and homelessness”, 4 September

TAIWAN
Taiwan
Amendments to the Immigration Act failed
to include protections against the
refoulement of asylum seekers. Legal
reforms provided greater protections for
Indigenous Peoples. Most limitations on
transnational same-sex marriage were
removed. Legal reforms granted the
authorities increased powers to prevent the
online sharing of non-consensual sexual
content. The government failed to commit
to a deadline to phase out fossil fuels.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In May, parliament passed an amendment to
the Immigration Act which may provide
improved rights to certain categories of
foreign workers to work, education and family
reunification. However, Taiwan still lacked an
asylum system and the government ignored
recommendations from civil society groups to
enshrine in law protections against the
refoulement of asylum seekers. It also
increased the fines for migrant workers who
flee their employers.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Parliament adopted an amendment to the
Mining Act in May requiring mining
companies to obtain free, prior and informed
consent from Indigenous Peoples before
conducting mining activities on or near their
lands. Also in May, parliament adopted the
long-awaited Health of Indigenous Peoples
Act, which increased the budgets for
healthcare for Indigenous People and
required the government to consult with them
when making policies affecting their health.

361

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In January, the government announced a
policy change granting all transnational
same-sex couples the right to marry in
Taiwan, except for couples where one partner
is Taiwanese and the other from the People’s
Republic of China.
A legal amendment to a law on same-sex
marriage adopted by parliament in May
allowed couples in same-sex marriages to
adopt children who are not biologically
related to either spouse, removing an earlier
barrier which restricted adoption to children
related to one spouse.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
In July, parliament strengthened legal
protections for survivors of sexual and
gender-based violence through an
amendment to the Sexual Assault Crime
Prevention Act. This gave police and other
government agencies powers to require
internet platforms, service and application
providers to block access to or remove nonconsensual sexually explicit images and
videos in order to protect survivors whose
intimate content is shared without consent.1
Amendments to other laws relating to sexual
and gender-based violence were also
adopted enabling victims to file complaints
with relevant authorities and requiring local
governments to provide mental health
services to them. However, the amendments
failed to adopt a consent-based definition of
rape, as required by human rights standards.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Several climate mitigation policies were
adopted by the government, including the
Climate Change Response Act, enacted in
January, which placed legal obligations on
the government to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions by 50% from 2005 levels by 2050.
In April, the government launched a “12
Key Strategies” action plan to achieving netzero carbon emissions by 2050 through
industry upgrades, application of carbon
capture and storage technologies and
decarbonizing energy production. However,
the government did not set out a timeline for

362

fulfilling its commitment to phase out the use
of fossil fuels.
The state-owned company CPC Corporation
continued to pursue oil exploration and
extraction activities overseas including in
Australia, where it acquired an interest in the
Dorado and four other oilfields off Western
Australia.
1. “Taiwan: A step forward in ending online sexual violence - the
enactment of Article 13 of the Sexual Assault Crime Prevention Act”,
17 August (Chinese only)

TAJIKISTAN
Republic of Tajikistan
The rights to freedom of peaceful assembly,
association and expression were further
curtailed. The authorities continued to
target human rights defenders, independent
journalists, bloggers and other dissenters
for arbitrary detention and imprisonment
after unfair trials. The crackdown on Ismaili
religious practices intensified. Torture and
other ill-treatment remained widespread.
Discrimination and marginalization of the
Pamiri and Roma/Jughi communities
continued.

BACKGROUND
The border with Kyrgyzstan remained closed
as a result of clashes in 2021 and 2022.
Widespread power outages in various
regions and rising prices continued to be
major concerns for the public.
International human rights groups remained
effectively barred from Tajikistan. This, and
severe reprisals against local human rights
monitors, greatly constrained information
gathering.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The few remaining independent media
outlets, human rights defenders and bloggers
were forced to exercise self-censorship, or
risk politically motivated prosecutions.
The authorities continued to crackdown on
the independent media outlets that were

The State of the World’s Human Rights

critical of the government. In July the news
portal Pamir Daily News and the website New
Tajikistan 2, which was affiliated to the
arbitrarily banned opposition Group 24, were
banned as “extremist organizations”. This
label implies the risk of criminal liability for
individuals inside Tajikistan who cooperate
with such media outlets.
On 26 May, Khurshed Fozilov, a journalist
who had reported on social issues in
Zerafshan valley, was sentenced to seven
years’ imprisonment for alleged participation
in the activities of prohibited organizations
after a closed trial which took place in a
detention facility.
Exiled dissidents were also targeted through
intimidation of their families in Tajikistan.
Journalists Anora Sarkorova and Rustami
Joni, who reported on human rights
violations, were put under pressure after their
relatives reportedly faced threatening
messages, criminal proceedings, intimidation
and interrogation.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
No major protests were reported since the
brutal suppression of demonstrators in the
Rushan district of Gorno-Badakhshan
Autonomous Oblast (GBAO) in May 2022. On
the first anniversary of that crackdown, the
authorities allegedly suppressed physical
gatherings and monitored online activities in
commemoration of the victims.
Relatives of members of the opposition
diaspora protesting abroad also faced
reprisals. According to Human Rights Watch
some 50 family members in Tajikistan were
detained and questioned after their relatives
held protests during President Emomali
Rahmon’s visit to Germany in September.
Tajikistan’s security agencies reportedly also
intimidated diaspora activists protesting
Abdullohi Shamsiddin’s deportation (see
below) by putting pressure on their relatives
in Tajikistan.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
The operating environment for NGOs
remained severely restrictive. After the
crackdown in GBAO, five NGOs were shut

The State of the World’s Human Rights

down by court decisions for their purported
links to criminal groups. Among them was
the Lawyers’ Association of Pamir whose
director, the lawyer and human rights
defender Manuchehr Kholiknazarov, had
been sentenced to 16 years’ imprisonment in
2022 following an unfair trial.1 Hundreds of
NGOs across the country were informally
coerced by security agencies or authorities to
“voluntarily” suspend their activities or
dissolve themselves.
The authorities also continued to defame
informal organizations in GBAO as criminal
groups.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
In April, President Rahmon reportedly signed
a decree which allowed the authorities to
bury the bodies of individuals killed in alleged
“anti-terrorist operations” in unmarked
graves in places chosen by the state and not
revealed to the relatives, ignoring religious
rites.
The crackdown on the religious practices by
Ismailis, a religious minority from GBAO,
which had gained traction in 2022 with the
destruction of religious symbols, the closing
of places of worship and a ban on religious
festivals, intensified. The authorities
continued penalizing collective prayer in
private homes, threatening prosecution
against religious educators, confiscating
religious education literature and reportedly
attempting to replace specific practices with
those followed by the Sunni Muslim majority.

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND UNFAIR
TRIALS
Arbitrary detention and unfair trials remained
common. On 23 January, several special
procedures of the UN Human Rights Council
expressed concern about the overly broad
definition of terrorist organizations in
Tajikistan’s legislation. Charges related to
alleged terrorism made possible the
application of exceptional powers, emergency
measures and restrictions on due process.
Tajikistani citizens targeted by the
authorities abroad and forcibly returned to
Tajikistan faced imprisonment following unfair

363

trials. On 18 January, Germany deported
14 years’ imprisonment on 25 July for their
Abdullohi Shamsiddin, an émigré closely
involvement in his death.
related to several leaders of the arbitrarily
Prisoners continued to report abuse,
banned Islamic Revival Party of Tajikistan.
including beatings, lack of access to food and
According to unofficial sources, after arrival
water, and cold and wet conditions within
in Tajikistan he was subjected to enforced
cells. Many prisoners allegedly suffered from
disappearance and held in solitary
tuberculosis without receiving adequate
confinement by the State Committee for
medical treatment.
National Security. On 29 March, a court in
DISCRIMINATION
the capital, Dushanbe, sentenced Abdullohi Shamsiddin
in a closed trial to seven years’ imprisonment
PAMIRIS
for “public calls for the violent change of the
In April, the CERD Committee expressed
constitutional order”.2
concern at the marginalization of and
In July the prison sentence of human rights
discrimination against the Pamiris, an ethnic
lawyer Buzurgmehr Yorov was extended by
and religious minority mainly residing in
10 years. His sentence, starting in 2016, of
GBAO. Although Tajikistan had adopted a
28 years’ imprisonment under false charges
Law on Equality and Elimination of All Forms
for representing members of the arbitrarily
of Discrimination in 2022, the Pamiris were
banned Islamic Renaissance Party of
not protected by the legislation as the
Tajikistan, had previously been reduced by
authorities denied that they were an
10 years.
ethnically or linguistically distinct group. The
On 29 September, Nizomiddin Nasriddinov,
authorities continued to forcefully assimilate
an activist who had cooperated with the
the Pamiri population, suppressing the use of
banned Group 24, was reportedly sentenced
Pamiri languages and the assertion of Pamiri
to eight and a half years in prison on similar
identity in state institutions, schools, the
charges after he had been forcibly returned
media, artistic performances and public
to Tajikistan by Belarus on 8 January. In
spaces.
neither this nor the above case was evidence
ROMA/JUGHI
or official information about the trial made
The CERD Committee also emphasized the
public.
need for a comprehensive strategy to address
marginalization and media bias against the
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Roma/Jughi community. Structural
Torture and other ill-treatment remained
discrimination was particularly evident in
widespread. They were reportedly used by
education, with low Roma/Jughi enrolment.
various security agencies, particularly the
State Committee for National Security and the RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
so-called Sixth Department of the Ministry of
Tajikistan relied on international finance
the Interior, as a means of extracting
assistance to meet its climate goals, and
“confessions” and incriminating others.
projects to support adaptation to climate
Methods used allegedly included sticking
change were mainly driven by international
needles under nails, electric shocks, beating,
organizations. In August, the World Bank
sexual violence, sleep deprivation, suffocation noted significant health problems and
with plastic bags and injection of drugs.
economic losses caused by air pollution with
Abdukakhkhor Rozikov died in police
the latter contributing to a mortality rate of 78
custody in the city of Kulob on 2 January. His
deaths per 100,000 inhabitants.
death was widely attributed to torture and
there were photographs and videos of his
1. “Tajikistan: Prominent members of Pamiri minority arbitrarily
body corroborating this allegation. In a rare
detained, tortured and unfairly convicted”, 21 September
move to hold perpetrators accountable, three
2. “Tajikistan: Tajik dissenter deported and convicted: Abdullohi
former police officers were each sentenced to
Shamsiddin”, 11 April

364

The State of the World’s Human Rights

TANZANIA
United Republic of Tanzania
The authorities cracked down on peaceful
dissent, arbitrarily arresting critics of the
president’s development agenda, opposition
members and those linked to the
opposition, lawyers, Indigenous Maasai
People and activists. Parliament amended
the Media Services Act. The high court
ruled in favour of the Maasais in Loliondo in
relation to their forced eviction from
ancestral land. East African Crude Oil
Pipeline Ltd obtained a licence to construct
a 1,443km pipeline. Authorities refused
access to international fact-finding missions
to assess human rights violations against
the Maasais in Ngorongoro. The decision to
withdraw a court declaration that would
allow individuals and NGOs direct access to
the African Court on Human and Peoples’
Rights remained in force. Despite
improvements in education provisions, low
school retention rates for girls persisted due
to poverty, early pregnancy and genderbased violence in schools. The use of
inflammatory language against LGBTI
people intensified.

BACKGROUND
In October 2022, the president signed an
intergovernmental agreement with the
emirate of Dubai in the United Arab Emirates
(UAE) for collaboration in the development,
management and operation of Tanzania’s
ports and other related infrastructure. On 10
June, parliament endorsed the agreement.
In February, the authorities launched a
public consultation process to guide a
forthcoming review of the constitution and
other laws.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
In January, the president lifted a punitive
blanket ban, imposed by the late president in
2016, on political parties organizing rallies
and other political activities. Prominent

The State of the World’s Human Rights

opposition politicians who had defied the ban
had, in the past, been arbitrarily arrested and
detained. However, authorities continued to
crack down on political activities, on critics of
government projects and on those opposing
forced evictions, including by using arbitrary
arrests, detention and intimidation.
At least 12 people were arrested between
June and December for criticizing the
Tanzania/UAE agreement. Those arrested
were released unconditionally after being
held for a few days. Rugemeleza Nshala, an
activist and former president of the
Tanganyika Law Society who had also
criticized the agreement, fled the country in
July after he faced police intimidation and
death threats on his phone from unknown
sources.
In June, parliament passed positive
amendments to the Media Services Act,
including by removing the criminal liability of
journalists in relation to professional conduct,
reducing penalties and fines for offenders in
sedition cases and withdrawing court powers
to confiscate media equipment.
On 14 July, lawyer and activist Boniface
Mwabukusi and political activist Mdude
Nyagali were arrested days after holding a
press conference in Dar es Salaam where
they criticized the Tanzania/UAE agreement.
On 12 August, they were re-arrested while
travelling to Dar es Salaam and taken to the
Central Police Station in the city of Mbeya.
The next day, police arrested Willibrod Slaa, a
former parliamentarian and diplomat, at his
home in Dar es Salaam and took him to
Mbweni Police Station. The three, who were
released on 18 August under strict reporting
conditions, faced treason charges.
On 6 September, the chief of police in
Ngorongoro district, Arusha region, issued a
warning to the main opposition Party for
Democracy and Progress (Chadema) against
holding a series of political rallies that were
planned in the Loliondo division for 8 and 9
September. Authorities cited security as
justification but did not provide further
details; they claimed the warning was in
accordance with Ngorongoro Conservation
Area (NCA) rules.

365

On 10 September, police arrested
opposition leader Tundu Lissu for holding an
“unlawful assembly” after he attended a
political rally in the Loliondo division. He was
arrested as he tried to access the NCA to
speak to Maasais participating in another
rally. He was released without charge the
same day.

FORCED EVICTIONS
At least 67 Maasais were arrested during the
year, mainly in Endulen village, Ngorongoro
division, for refusing to leave their ancestral
lands under ongoing enforced relocation
plans to establish a protected wildlife area in
the Ngorongoro Conservation Area. Some
were held for a few hours and others for a
few days.
On 7 August, the high court in Mbeya
issued a decision revoking a government
directive to evict about 21,000 people from
their land in five of 39 villages bordering
Ruaha National Park in Mbarali district,
Mbeya region. The government said it wanted
the land for wildlife conservation within the
national park. The case before the high court
had been filed in January by 852 smallholder
farmers from Marili, following an October
2022 eviction notice issued by the minister of
land, housing and human settlement
development, which declared the villages to
be inside the national park. Just before the
high court’s ruling, the Assistant
Commissioner of Lands for Mbeya told
parliament’s Standing Committee for Lands,
Natural Resources and Tourism that the
government had, in fact, returned 744.32km2
of the land to the community in Mbarali.
On 19 September, the high court sitting in
Arusha region found that the Pololeti Game
Controlled Area in Loliondo division was
established illegally. On 17 June 2022, the
minister for natural resources and tourism
had declared Pololeti a “game-controlled
area” – an area designated for wildlife
preservation – to justify the forced evictions of
Maasais from 1,500km2 of their land. The
community challenged this declaration in a
judicial review filed in November 2022. The
high court ruled that the government had not

366

consulted the residents when making the
declaration, rendering the process void.
At the end of the year, around 100 Maasai
families remained in impoverished conditions
with little access to livelihoods in the
Oloolaimutia and Olpusimoru villages in
Narok county in Kenya. They had fled there
with their livestock after their homesteads
were destroyed during the June 2022 forced
evictions in the Loliondo division.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
The International Monetary Fund reported
that while “highly vulnerable to climate
change”, Tanzania was “less prepared than
most countries to address its impacts.”
On 24 January, East African Crude Oil
Pipeline (EACOP) Ltd, a fossil fuel company,
received a licence allowing it to commence
the development of the 1,443km East African
Crude Oil Pipeline to transport crude oil from
the Lake Albert oilfields in western Uganda to
Tanga Port on Tanzania’s northern coast for
export (see Uganda entry). The project
involves the construction of a 61cm diameter
heated pipeline.
On 5 April, the East African Court of Justice
(EACJ) reserved judgment in the case of a
lawsuit filed three years earlier by Kenyan,
Ugandan and Tanzanian civil society groups
who sought a temporary injunction with a
view to preventing the construction of the
pipeline. The EACJ heard arguments from
the East African Community secretarygeneral, and the Tanzanian and Ugandan
governments who contended, among other
things, that the matter was outside the court’s
jurisdiction. The civil society groups had
brought the case in response to concerns
about the pipeline’s adverse impact on the
environment, and the displacement of local
people, including Indigenous Peoples, whose
rights to livelihoods, food and health were
threatened by the project. On 29 November,
the court dismissed the lawsuit, regarding it
as time barred, and ruled that the applicants
should have filed the case as early as 2017
rather than in 2020. The civil society groups
appealed the decision on 11 December.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
The authorities denied widespread reports of
violent forced evictions against the Maasais
from their land in Ngorongoro. They also
denied requests from intergovernmental
organizations to conduct fact-finding
missions in Ngorongoro. The government did,
however, allow an African Commission on
Human and Peoples’ Rights delegation to
undertake a promotion mission between 23
and 28 January. The delegation raised
concerns about forced evictions of Maasais,
noting a lack of adequate consultation with,
and inclusion of, the local communities in the
demarcation exercise of lands they laid claim
to; and reports of the use of force and threats
against community members who contested
the demarcation. On 25 August, the
government prevented a UNESCO factfinding delegation from visiting the area.
Again, on 2 September, a delegation of
members of the European Parliament were
refused access, despite the government
previously agreeing to their visit to investigate
human rights abuses against the Maasais.
Government announcements made in 2022
indicating that it would revisit its decision to
withdraw from the declaration made under
Article 34(6) of the Protocol to the African
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on
the Establishment of an African Court on
Human and Peoples’ Rights (AfCHPR),
remained unrealized. Therefore, individuals
and NGOs, failed by the national legal
system, remained unable to enjoy direct
access to the AfCHPR. The government had
signed its notice of withdrawal in 2019.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
The National Panel Survey showed that
although there was progress in the provision
of quality education, improvements were
needed, specifically in relation to low
retention rates for girls. Despite the lifting in
February 2022 of the ban on pregnant girls
and adolescent mothers attending
mainstream schools, low retention rates
continued due to poverty, early pregnancy
and gender-based violence in schools. There

The State of the World’s Human Rights

was, however, an overall increase in
enrolment and literacy rates, and a reduction
in the barriers to children’s access to school.
The World Bank concluded that “the
government’s policies and interventions …
allowed the country to move towards greater
access to education, especially in the most
underserved areas.”

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In February, the education minister issued a
ban on books in public and private schools
that include LGBTI content, and urged the
public to report any books containing such
content.
In March, the head of the women’s wing of
Chadema urged the government to pass
legislation that would provide for the
castration of anyone convicted of consensual
same-sex sexual relations. On 12 April, an
MP introduced a parliamentary debate,
arguing that unless action is taken, Tanzania
“risked having gay people in positions of
power or authority”. Another MP proposed
the death penalty for people convicted of
consensual same-sex sexual relations.

THAILAND
Kingdom of Thailand
Authorities continued the crackdown on
freedom of peaceful assembly and
expression. Hundreds of children were
among those brought to trial or facing
criminal charges for participating in
peaceful protests. Human rights defenders
also faced judicial and other forms of
harassment. A new law criminalized torture
and enforced disappearances but effective
accountability remained elusive, including
for the 2014 disappearance of a defender
of Indigenous People’s rights. A new
mechanism for screening refugees and
asylum seekers was established but many
were held in indefinite detention where poor
conditions resulted in the deaths of two
Uyghur men.

367

BACKGROUND
The pro-democracy Move Forward Party won
the most seats in national elections in May
but failed to secure enough votes from MPs
to form a government. On 5 September, the
runner-up Pheu Thai Party took office along
with its coalition partners that included two
parties with close ties to the military.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
The government continued its crackdown on
overwhelmingly peaceful protests calling for
political and social reforms. According to the
local NGO Thai Lawyers for Human Rights
(TLHR) by December at least 1,938 people
had been charged in relation to their
participation in protests since 2020. The
majority, 1,469, were charged under an
emergency decree banning public gatherings
during the Covid-19 pandemic which was
lifted in late 2022. Hundreds of others were
charged with lèse-majesté (defaming,
insulting or threatening the monarch) or with
sedition. As of December, the prosecutions of
795 cases were ongoing.
Among those convicted was Anon Nampa, a
prominent human rights lawyer who was
found guilty of lèse-majesté on 26 September
and sentenced to four years’ imprisonment
for delivering a speech during a protest in
October 2020 calling for a national
conversation on the role of the monarchy. He
faced 13 other counts of lèse-majesté.
The courts repeatedly denied requests for
bail by Anon Nampa and 23 others detained
on protest-related charges. In January, prodemocracy activists Tantawan Tuatulanon
and Orawan Phuphong were hospitalized
after going on hunger strike to protest against
bail refusals. Both were charged with lèsemajesté in 2022 for conducting public
opinion polls about royal motorcades.
The authorities also continued to use the
Computer Crimes Act against their critics.
According to TLHR, at least 195 people had
been charged under this law since 2020.
They included political activist Ekachai
Hongkangwan who was acquitted in June of
impeding a royal motorcade during a pro-

368

democracy protest, but was sentenced in
July to one year's imprisonment under an
ambiguous provision of the Act that
criminalizes the sharing of obscene
information.1
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
Amnesty International’s research exposed the
multiple ways in which the rights of children,
who have been at the forefront of mass
protests, have been suppressed by the
authorities including through criminalization,
surveillance and intimidation.2
As of October, criminal charges had been
brought against 286 children for their
participation in protests since 2020. They
included Yok, a 15-year-old girl who was
arrested in March in connection with her
participation in a protest in 2022 calling for
the repeal of the lèse-majesté law.3 She was
held in pretrial detention for 51 days before a
court ordered her release.
On 20 July, the Central Juvenile and Family
Court sentenced Noppasin “Sainam”
Treelayapewat to one year’s imprisonment,
suspended for two years, after he was found
guilty of lèse-majesté for taking part in a
mock fashion show in 2020 that satirized the
monarchy. Sainam was aged 16 at the time
of the show.4
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
There were growing concerns about the
digital harassment of human rights
defenders. In August, six UN human rights
experts wrote to the Thai government
expressing concern about lack of protection
measures or accountability for the online
intimidation and harassment of two
prominent human rights defenders,
Angkhana Neelapaijit and Anchana
Heemmina. In February, the Civil Court
dismissed a lawsuit brought by the two
women against the Royal Thai Army and the
Prime Minister’s Office, which they alleged
had carried out an online smear campaign
against them in connection with their
legitimate human rights work.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In April, four UN Special Rapporteurs wrote
to the Prime Minister raising concerns about

The State of the World’s Human Rights

the use of cyber-intelligence company NSO
Group’s Pegasus spyware in devices
belonging to 35 people including human
rights defenders, politicians and civil society
activists during nationwide protests in 2020
and 2021, and the government’s failure to
protect those allegedly subjected to unlawful
surveillance. On 13 June, Jatupat
Boonpattararaksa, a human rights defender
whose phone was infected with the spyware,
filed a lawsuit against the NSO Group seeking
financial compensation for violating his right
to privacy.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
AND ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
In February, following years of pressure by
civil society and victims, the Act on the
Prevention and Suppression of Torture and
Enforced Disappearance entered into force
criminalizing torture, other forms of illtreatment and enforced disappearance for
the first time, and establishing procedural
safeguards against such practices. However,
the law did not include provisions which
would make statements obtained by torture
or during enforced disappearance
inadmissible as evidence in legal
proceedings.5
On 28 September, a court acquitted four
national park officers of abducting and
murdering Indigenous Karen human rights
defender Pholachi “Billy” Rakchongcharoen.
Billy was involved in a lawsuit against Kaeng
Krachan National Park officers for the forced
evictions of local communities and burning of
Karen homes when he disappeared in Kaeng
Krachan National Park in April 2014 after
being detained for allegedly possessing wild
honey.6 One of the accused was found guilty
of failing to report Billy’s detention to the
police and sentenced to three years’
imprisonment, but was subsequently
released on bail.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
On 22 September, a regulation to establish a
screening mechanism to grant protected
status to asylum seekers seeking protection
from persecution came into force. Human

The State of the World’s Human Rights

rights organizations raised concerns about
the exclusion of migrant workers from
Myanmar, Laos, Viet Nam and Cambodia
from accessing protection and about
provisions that allow the authorities to deny
protection on “national security” grounds
without being required to explain why the
decision was made.
Irregular migrants, including asylum
seekers, were arbitrarily and indefinitely
detained in squalid immigration detention
centres. Two ethnic Uyghur men, Aziz
Abdullah and Mattohti Mattursun, died in the
capital Bangkok’s Suan Phlu Immigration
Detention Center in February and April
respectively. They were among a group of
around 50 Uyghurs from China’s Xinjiang
Uyghur Autonomous Region who had been
detained since they arrived in Thailand in
2014.
On 13 April, Vietnamese Youtuber Đường
Văn Thái disappeared from his residence in
Bangkok in circumstances that suggested the
involvement of Viet Nam state agents. He was
subsequently detained in Viet Nam and
charged with “disseminating propaganda
against the state”.
In an ongoing pattern of targeting
individuals affiliated with the network of
human rights defenders from Laos, on 17
May, UNHCR-recognized refugee Bounsuan
Kitiyano was shot dead by an unidentified
gunman in Ubon Ratchathani province in
north-east Thailand.7
On 7 July, authorities arrested Thol
Samnang, a Cambodian political activist and
affiliate of the Candlelight Party. Samnang
was on his way to apply for refugee status at
UNHCR’s office in Bangkok at the time of his
arrest.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
On 21 December, Thai lawmakers debated a
package of bills to legalize same-sex
marriages.8 The Marriage Equality Bill
received resounding support in the House of
Representatives and started the process of
multiple readings and stages of approval
before it may become law.

369

IMPUNITY

BACKGROUND

There was still no accountability for the
deaths in 2004 of 85 people who were shot
or died after being arrested during protests to
demand the release of six Malay Muslim men
from Tak Bai Police Station in Narathiwat
province, one of Thailand’s southern border
provinces.9

According to the government, attacks by
armed groups and clashes between
government forces and armed groups
resulted in at least 31 deaths, including of 11
civilians, and 29 injuries in the Savanes
region, bordering Burkina Faso. Togo hosted
9,965 refugees, mainly from Burkina Faso,
and 7,077 people were internally displaced
as a result of the attacks.
Legislative and regional elections were
postponed from December until 13 April
2024.

1. “Thailand: Amnesty International’s response to the one-year
imprisonment of activist Ekachai under the Computer Crimes Act,” 7
July
2. Thailand: “We are reclaiming our future”: Children’s right to peaceful
assembly in Thailand, 8 February
3. “Thailand: 15-year-old girl held in pretrial detention for lèsemajesté”, 30 March
4. “Thailand: Drop ‘insulting the monarchy’ charge against child
protester involved in mock fashion show”, 17 July
5. “Thailand, Law to address torture and enforced disappearance is an
important step towards justice but its full enforcement is critical”,
22 February
6. “Thailand: Upcoming verdict in case of murdered Indigenous activist
‘Billy’ must deliver justice”, 26 September
7. “Thailand/Laos: Investigate the killing of Lao refugee and put an end
to transnational repression of human rights defenders”, 26 May
8. “Thailand: Historic same-sex marriage bills are moment of hope for
LGBTI rights” 21 December
9. “Thailand: Thai authorities must act now to deliver justice for victims
of the brutal protest dispersal in Tak Bai”, 24 October

TOGO
Togolese Republic
The authorities repressed the rights to
freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly. Media freedom was threatened,
with newspapers suspended and journalists
given prison sentences for “defamation” or
publishing “false” news. The ECOWAS
Court of Justice issued rulings in three
cases, denouncing incidents of torture and
other ill-treatment of detainees, and
arbitrary arrests and detention in Togo.
NGOs denounced allegations of official
corruption. Access to maternal health
services was hampered by staff shortages,
dilapidated equipment and poor quality of
care.

370

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
On 1 February, the High Authority of
Audiovisual and Communication (HAAC)
suspended Liberté and Tampa Express
newspapers for three months. The decision
to suspend Tampa Express was taken after
the chief executive of Africa Global Logistics
in Togo filed a lawsuit against the newspaper
for “defamation and publication of false
information”. Liberté was suspended after, on
12 January, the Lomé Court of Appeal fined
the newspaper’s director, and a journalist on
the editorial staff, CFA 5 million (around USD
8,176) each for “spreading false news and
insulting the Prime Minister”. This followed a
complaint lodged by the prime minister in
September 2022. On 2 March, the Supreme
Court overturned HAAC’s decision to suspend
Liberté.
On 15 March, Ferdinand Ayité, a member of
the International Consortium of Investigative
Journalists and director of L’Alternative
newspaper was sentenced with Isidore
Kowonou, editor-in-chief of the same
newspaper, to three years in prison and a fine
of CFA 3 million (around USD 4,828) for
“contempt of authorities” and “propagation of
falsehoods”. He had accused two members
of the government of corruption. The
journalists appealed the decision but fled the
country to avoid serving their sentences.
The editor of Tampa Express was
summoned to the Criminal Investigation
Department on 20 September for
interrogation about his sources for an article

The State of the World’s Human Rights

on allegations of corruption in public service
exams.
Two journalists were detained for 18 days
after the Minister of Town Planning made
accusations against them including of
“defamation” and “incitement to revolt”, after
they reported on money being stolen from the
minister’s residence. They were released on
bail in December, under judicial supervision,
and their passports were confiscated.
Access within Togo to the website belonging
to the civil society platform, Togo Debout, was
disrupted. Togo Debout representatives
believed that the authorities caused the
disruption in response to the platform’s
tendency to criticize the government’s
policies and actions.
On 11 October, the authorities banned a
ceremony organized by NGOs to launch a
project to strengthen civil society and ensure
the protection and promotion of the rights to
freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly. No formal notification was
provided in advance of the ban.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
On 7 June, the ECOWAS Court of Justice
ordered the immediate release of 10 people
who had been held without trial since 2019
on charges of breaching state security. The
court also ordered the state to pay
reparations to each of the complainants for
their prolonged detention and ill-treatment in
custody; and called on the state to investigate
their ill-treatment. However, the 10 detainees
remained in detention.
On 5 July, the same court ordered the state
to pay reparations to Agbogbo Kossi Edem for
the violation of his human rights after he was
arrested and beaten by security agents while
participating in a demonstration calling for
the 2020 presidential election results to be
released. The court ruled that his detention
was arbitrary and ordered the state to
investigate his ill-treatment.
In November, the ECOWAS court ordered
the immediate release of 15 people arrested
in connection with the August 2017
demonstrations, and ordered the state to pay
reparations to each of them. The court said

The State of the World’s Human Rights

that their rights to be protected from torture
or other ill-treatment, and arbitrary detention
had been violated.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
In January, a Court of Auditors report
revealed significant irregularities in the
management of the Covid-19 Response and
Solidarity Fund established to combat the
effects of the pandemic and its economic
consequences. In May, NGOs and lawyers
cited this report in a case brought before the
ECOWAS Court of Justice in which they
denounced inaction by the authorities to
prevent and combat corruption.
RIGHT TO HEALTH
Access to maternal health services was
hampered by staff shortages, dilapidated
equipment and poor quality of care.1 This
had an adverse impact on the care offered to
patients during prenatal consultations and
childbirth. Some maternity units did not have
enough staff, adequate basic equipment and
sanitary facilities needed to provide decent
care to patients, while midwives struggled to
cope with excessive workloads.
1. “Togo: ‘Some women give birth on the floor’ amid staff shortages,
poor facilities”, 31 July

TUNISIA
Republic of Tunisia
Authorities escalated their crackdown on
dissent, using unfounded charges against
high-profile opposition figures and other
critics. Parliamentarians proposed
repressive legislation that threatened
independent civil society organizations.
Dozens of social justice and environmental
protesters were unjustly prosecuted.
Judicial independence, accountability and
the right to a fair trial continued to be
undermined. Racist remarks by the
president triggered a wave of anti-Black
assaults and arrests. Authorities increased
interceptions at sea exponentially,

371

conducting collective mass expulsions to
the borders with Algeria and Libya.
Women’s representation in parliament
dropped by half. LGBTI people and human
rights defenders were subjected to
harassment and an online hate campaign.
Tunisia’s cost of living and environmental
crises deepened, directly impacting access
to food and water.

BACKGROUND
Following elections that took place between
December 2022 and January 2023, with a
record low turnout of 11%, a new
parliamentary session started on 13 March,
the first since President Kais Saied
suspended the legislative body in July 2021.
On 8 March, the president dissolved all
elected municipal councils.
On 9 May, a National Guard officer attacked
the Ghriba synagogue on Djerba island,
killing five people.
On 16 July, the European Commission and
Tunisia signed a memorandum of
understanding, providing financial support to
Tunisia to combat irregular migration. The
agreement was negotiated without input from
civil society and omits crucial human rights
safeguards.1
Negotiations stalled with the International
Monetary Fund over a USD 1.9 billion rescue
package opposed by President Saied.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Authorities ramped up their targeting of
individuals exercising their right to freedom of
expression, making frequent use of the new
draconian Decree-Law 2022-54 on
cybercrime.
At least 22 individuals, including lawyers,
journalists, bloggers and political activists,
were summoned for questioning, prosecuted
or sentenced in relation to public comments
perceived as critical of the authorities,
including at least 13 on the basis of the
cybercrime law and in most cases following
governmental complaints.
In March and April, the parliament
twice banned private and foreign media from
attending parliamentary sessions and, in

372

June, banned journalists from covering
parliamentary committee meetings.
On 16 May, the appeal court in the capital,
Tunis, sentenced journalist Khalifa Guesmi to
five years’ imprisonment for his reporting on
security operations.
On 13 December, a Tunis military court
convicted political activist Chaima Issa to a
12-month suspended prison sentence for
critical remarks about the authorities.
The National Syndicate of Tunisian
Journalists reported dozens of incidents of
harassment and obstruction of journalists
while reporting on the parliamentary
elections.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
Authorities escalated their crackdown on
dissent by targeting a wider range of
opposition figures, using expression-related
offences as well as conspiracy and terrorism
charges to detain, investigate and sentence
them.
Judicial authorities particularly targeted
members of Ennahda, the largest opposition
party. They initiated criminal investigations
against at least 21 Ennahda leaders and
members, and detained at least 12. On 30
October, the Tunis appeal court sentenced
Rached Ghannouchi, Ennahda’s president
and former speaker of the dissolved
parliament, to 15 months’ imprisonment
under the 2015 anti-terrorism law, based on
his public remarks.2 On 13 February, security
forces arrested former justice minister and
Ennahda leader Noureddine Bhiri. In
November, an indictment chamber referred
him to a criminal court. He remained in
pretrial detention on capital charges based
on his critical online remarks.
From February onwards, at least 50 people,
including opposition figures,3 human rights
defenders, lawyers and businesspeople were
under investigation in a so-called conspiracy
case,4 facing trumped-up charges that carry
heavy prison sentences and the death
penalty.5 On 3 October, police arrested Abir
Moussi, head of the opposition Free
Destourian Party, while she was trying to file
an appeal against presidential decrees

The State of the World’s Human Rights

related to the organization of upcoming
elections.6 She remained in pretrial detention
under capital charges brought against her for
exercising her right to freedom of expression
and assembly.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
President Saied continued to accuse civil
society organizations of interfering in Tunisia’s
affairs and financing corruption.
On 18 April, police ordered everyone out of
Ennahda’s headquarters in Tunis without
presenting any legal documentation, closed it
down and forbade anyone from returning. In
a leaked internal communication, the interior
ministry directed police to ban meetings and
gatherings in the offices of Ennahda and the
National Salvation Front.
On 10 October, a group of parliamentarians
submitted a draft law on associations to
replace the 2011 Decree-law 88 on
associations, which would undermine civil
society’s independence.7 On 11 December,
the prime minister announced that a crosssectoral committee would work on drafting a
new law.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
According to the Tunisian Forum for
Economic and Social Rights (FTDES), 3,016
protest actions had taken place in 2023 by
November. Police allowed most
demonstrations to take place, but dispersed
some protests. For example, several farm
workers protesting in Kasbah Square in Tunis
on 9 February were detained and had their
phones searched.
In March, a public prosecutor in Siliana
town in northern Tunisia prosecuted 28
individuals in relation to protests calling for
their right to water. On 8 June, a court in the
south-eastern city of Sfax sentenced at least
four environmental activists to eight months
in prison on charges of obstruction of work.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
Judges who had been summarily dismissed
by presidential decree in June 2022
continued to be denied reparation. No
judicial action was taken following individual

The State of the World’s Human Rights

complaints filed on 23 January by 37 of them
against the minister of justice to contest the
non-implementation of a Tunis administrative
court order to reinstate 49 of the 57
dismissed judges and prosecutors.
Presidential public remarks urging the
prosecution of government critics
undermined the independence of the
judiciary and the right to a fair trial.
Judicial authorities arbitrarily renewed
pretrial detention orders against at least 20
prominent opponents, public figures and
perceived critics of President Saied
imprisoned for between five months and two
years, including for unfounded conspiracy
and terrorism accusations.8
Military courts continued to prosecute
civilians. On 20 January, a military appeals
court sentenced six civilians, including four
opposition politicians from Al Karama
coalition and a prominent lawyer, to between
five and 14 months in prison on charges that
included insulting and threatening a public
official.9

IMPUNITY
Authorities failed to hold to account members
of security forces and political representatives
credibly accused of human rights violations.
A Tunis court fined six individuals for filming
in January police beating a man in El
Kabbaria, a district of southern Tunis, and for
publishing the footage online. The individuals
prosecuted included members of the AntiMarginalization Generation Association and
the victim.
On 2 March, an investigating judge charged
Sihem Ben Sedrine, former head of the Truth
and Dignity Commission, on trumped-up
charges related to her leadership of the
commission and imposed a travel ban on her.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The year saw a marked deterioration in the
protection of migrants’ and refugees’ rights.
On 21 February, President Saied made
discriminatory and hateful remarks, triggering
an upsurge in anti-Black racist violence by
citizens and police, and hundreds of arbitrary
arrests.10

373

On 11 April, police used tear gas
excessively against migrants, asylum seekers
and refugees staging a sit-in outside the
offices of UNHCR, the UN refugee agency, in
Tunis, arresting and beating many in custody.
From July onwards, security authorities
rounded up and conducted mass arbitrary
expulsions of several thousand migrants,
asylum seekers and refugees, including
children, to Libya and Algeria. According to
UNHCR, at least 28 people died in the desert
region along the Libyan border between July
and August. These collective expulsions
occurred without individualized assessments
or judicial process. Many of the expulsions
followed interceptions at sea, which
increased exponentially from July onwards,
often involving reckless manoeuvres that
injured migrants. Police and the National
Guard tortured and otherwise ill-treated
individuals during disembarkation,
deportation and detention.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Gender parity gains were reversed with the
election of the new parliament, which
included only 25 women in the 161 seats,
after the removal of gender parity provisions
in the electoral law.
The Tunisian Association of Democratic
Women documented at least 21 femicides
and said they had supported more than 600
women who reported being subjected to
violence.
In March, a national collective of women
farm workers called for legislative reforms to
guarantee their access to health coverage,
safe transportation and a decent livelihood.
According to an FTDES study, 92% of women
farm workers interviewed did not benefit from
social protection.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Hate campaigns and harassment against
LGBTI defenders and people increased
significantly.
In July, Damj, the Tunisian Association for
Justice and Equality, reported that security
force members threatened to close their
offices. On 8 August, Damj filed a complaint

374

following an online defamation and hate
campaign.
Courts continued to sentence people to up
to two years in prison under Article 230 of the
Penal Code, which criminalizes consensual
adult same-sex sexual relations.

RIGHT TO FOOD
Tunisia’s cost of living and economic crises
deepened, further threatening access to a
range of socio-economic rights, including the
right to food.
According to the National Institute of
Statistics, as of November, food inflation
stood at 14.5% compared to 2022. Shortages
of staple foods became chronic. The
government reduced its spending on food
subsidies by 19% in the first half of the year
compared to 2022.

RIGHT TO WATER
Tunisia suffered its worst drought on record.
On 31 March, the state water company
announced it would administer water cuts at
night and the Ministry of Agriculture
announced restrictions on the use of tap
water, which were renewed indefinitely on 28
September. The statements did not clearly
explain which areas would be affected by the
cuts or the discrepancies between areas that
experienced no cuts or longer cuts, including
during the day. On 20 November, the head of
the state water company said the
discrepancies were due to differences in
altitude impacting water availability. In a July
report, the UN Special Rapporteur on human
rights to safe drinking water and sanitation
highlighted that the government repeatedly
prioritized water usage by powerful economic
sectors, including big agriculture and mining,
over water required for drinking and domestic
use.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Tunisia increasingly suffered the adverse
effects of climate change and experienced a
drought, heat wave and wildfires at record
levels. On 14 June, the Ministry of
Environment presented a draft environmental
code that included a section on the fight

The State of the World’s Human Rights

against climate change and proposed
creating a higher body in charge of the
“ecological transition”.

There were serious and credible allegations
of torture and other ill-treatment. A
government support programme benefited
millions of people living in poverty.

1. “EU/Tunisia: Agreement on migration ‘makes EU complicit’ in abuses
against asylum seekers, refugees and migrants”, 17 July

BACKGROUND

2. “Tunisia: Ghannouchi sentencing marks aggressive crackdown on
Saied opposition”, 18 May
3. “Tunisia: Political activists unjustly detained: Chaima Issa, Jaouhar
Ben Mbarek & Khayam Turki”, 26 May
4. “Tunisia: Authorities add human rights lawyers to trumped-up
conspiracy case", 9 May;
5. “Tunisia: Drop trumped-up charges against arbitrarily detained
political dissidents”, 10 October
6. “Tunisia: Opposition figure arbitrarily detained: Abir Moussi”, 7
December
7. “Tunisia: Repressive NGO draft law threatens independent civil
society”, 21 October
8. “Tunisia: The abuse of pretrial detention to silence political
opponents, authorities targeting political opposition with vague
pretrial detention laws”, 22 September
9. “Tunisia: Convictions of six civilians by military courts must be
quashed”, 2 February
10. “Tunisia: President’s racist speech incites a wave of violence against
Black Africans”, 10 March

TÜRKIYE
Republic of Türkiye
Baseless investigations, prosecutions and
convictions of human rights defenders,
journalists, opposition politicians and others
persisted. Anti-terror and disinformation
laws were used to curtail freedom of
expression. Freedom of peaceful assembly
was unlawfully restricted. Distribution of aid
after the February earthquakes failed to
adequately address the rights and needs of
people with disabilities. Violence against
women and girls remained widespread.
Discriminatory and stigmatizing rhetoric
against LGBTI people and refugees and
migrants increased in the run-up to the May
presidential and legislative elections. The
country continued to host the world’s
largest number of refugees; some remained
at risk of being unlawfully returned. Victims
of human rights violations by state officials
continued to face a culture of impunity.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

On 6 February, two catastrophic earthquakes
devastated 11 provinces, impacting more
than 15 million people in south-eastern
Türkiye and causing widespread destruction,
displacement and dispossession. According
to the Ministry of Interior, at least 50,000
people died, including 7,302 refugees and
migrants. Hundreds of thousands were left
homeless without shelter, food, water and
medical care.
President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan won a third
term in office after presidential elections in
May.
On 1 October, a group affiliated with the
Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) claimed
responsibility for a suicide bombing in the
capital, Ankara, which injured two police
officers. In retaliation, on 5 and 6 October,
Türkiye launched air strikes on Kurdishcontrolled areas of north-east Syria, killing 11
civilians and destroying vital infrastructure.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In the immediate aftermath of the February
earthquakes the authorities restricted access
to Twitter and TikTok. They detained at least
257 people for criticizing the government’s
earthquake response, including journalists
and some people based solely on their social
media posts.
In February, journalist Sinan Aygül, who was
the first person to be remanded in pretrial
detention in 2022 under the criminal offence
of “publicly spreading disinformation”, was
sentenced to 10 months’ imprisonment for a
tweet in which he had shared unconfirmed
sexual abuse allegations. On 1 November,
journalist Tolga Şardan was remanded in
custody for six days on the same charge for
his article on corruption in the justice system.
In May, pop singer Gülşen was sentenced to
10 months’ imprisonment, suspended, for
“inciting the public to hatred and enmity” in
relation to a video circulated on social media

375

depicting a humorous exchange between
herself and a band member in 2022.
The prosecution continued of 15 journalists,
including the co-chair of the Dicle Fırat
Journalists’ Association, on charges of
“membership of a terrorist organization”. In
July they were conditionally released from 13
months’ pretrial detention in the city of
Diyarbakır.
In July, T24 editor Sibel Yükler,
Mezopotamya Agency reporters Delal Akyüz
and Fırat Can Arslan, Bianet editor Evrim
Kepenek and freelance journalist Evrim Deniz
were detained and accused of “targeting a
public official involved in the fight against
terrorism”. The charge related to their social
media posts concerning the relocation of a
prosecutor and a judge, a married couple,
who had both been assigned to the
prosecution of 15 journalists in Diyarbakır
(see above). Fırat Can Arslan became the
first journalist remanded in pretrial detention
on charges under Article 6 of the antiterrorism law; he was acquitted and released
at the first hearing on 31 October.
In September, the Ankara chief prosecutor
initiated a criminal investigation against the
opposition MP Sezgin Tanrıkulu for
“denigrating the Turkish nation and state”
and “inciting the public to hatred or hostility”,
following his critical comments about the
Turkish armed forces during a television
programme.
In September, the mayor of Antalya
Municipality cancelled the 60th Antalya
Golden Orange Film Festival, and dismissed
the festival director, following disputes over
the screening of a documentary entitled The
Decree. The film depicted public sector
workers who had been summarily dismissed
following the failed coup in 2016.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
On 11 November, the Saturday Mothers/
People, a group of human rights defenders
including relatives of victims of enforced
disappearances, were allowed to read a short
statement near Galatasaray Square in
Istanbul, a place of symbolic importance to
the group, after being banned from doing so

376

for over five years.1 This positive development
fell short of constitutional court decisions that
the group’s freedom of assembly should be
upheld, and between April and November
law enforcement officials had continued to
use unlawful force to disperse their protests
and detain and prosecute participants.
A number of peaceful Pride marches took
place despite blanket bans in at least six
provinces and four districts across the
country. At least 224 people were arbitrarily
detained during the Pride season, including
bystanders, children, lawyers, journalists,
university students, human rights defenders
and foreign nationals.
On 20 July, law enforcement officials
prevented several commemorations of the
2015 killing of 33 people in the south-eastern
town of Suruç in a bombing by the armed
group Islamic State. At least 187 protesters
were arbitrarily detained in the cities of
Istanbul, Izmir and Ankara. In Istanbul
authorities kettled protesters, using pepper
spray, plastic bullets and unlawful force.
Between July and September, police used
unlawful force, water cannon and pepper
spray at close range against ecological
activists protesting at the felling of thousands
of trees to expand a coal mine in Akbelen
forest in Muğla province. At least 50 activists
were detained then later released, although
some were subjected to travel restrictions
and three were banned from entering Milas
district in Muğla province.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Türkiye remained on the “grey list” of the
intergovernmental Financial Action Task
Force, while continuing to use its
recommendations on combating money
laundering and financing terrorism as a
smokescreen to facilitate harassment of
NGOs. The authorities intensified the use of
intrusive NGO audits under the Law on the
Prevention of the Financing of the
Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction.
In September, a court rejected a lawsuit
seeking the closure of the NGO We Will Stop
Femicides Platform for alleged “illegal and
immoral activities... damaging the Turkish

The State of the World’s Human Rights

family structure under the guise of defending
women’s rights.”
The prosecution of at least 15 members of
the Migration Monitoring Association accused
of “membership of a terrorist organization”
continued at the end of the year, as did
proceedings to close the association for
allegedly “operating in line with the goals and
objectives of an armed terrorist group”.
The 2021 case to close the second biggest
opposition party, the People’s Democratic
Party, and impose a five-year political ban on
451 former and current members, was still
pending at the end of the year.
In November, a civil court in Ankara
dismissed the 11 members of the Central
Council of the Turkish Medical Association for
“having acted outside of the founding aims of
the Association”. The decision was pending
on appeal at the end of the year.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In January, Şebnem Korur Fincancı was
convicted of “making propaganda for a
terrorist organization” and sentenced to 32
months’ imprisonment for calling for an
independent investigation into the alleged
use of chemical weapons in the Kurdistan
Region of Iraq in 2022. She was released
pending appeal.
In June, Istanbul Heavy Penal Court No. 35
overturned the 2020 convictions of Özlem
Dalkıran, Idil Eser, Taner Kılıç and Günal
Kurşun, four human rights defenders in the
so-called Büyükada prosecution, for “lack of
evidence”, in line with the earlier Court of
Cassation judgment. A prosecution appeal
against the acquittal of Taner Kılıç was
pending at the end of the year.2
The courts again failed to implement
judgments by the European Court of Human
Rights in the cases of Osman Kavala and
Selahattin Demirtaş, despite Türkiye facing an
infringement proceeding for its refusal to
release Osman Kavala. Furthermore, in
September, Türkiye’s highest court of appeals
upheld the life sentence against Osman
Kavala and 18-year jail sentences against
Çiğdem Mater, Can Atalay, Mine Özerden and
Tayfun Kahraman, despite the prosecuting

The State of the World’s Human Rights

authorities’ repeated failure to provide any
evidence. The convictions of Mücella Yapıcı,
Hakan Altınay and Yiğit Ali Ekmekçi were
overturned.3
Can Atalay, detained in 2022 in connection
with the Gezi Park protests, was elected as
an MP for the southern province of Hatay in
the May parliamentary elections, but in July
the court of cassation denied his appeal for
release. In October and December, the
constitutional court twice ruled that his
continued detention was a violation of his
rights.4 The court of cassation refused to
implement the binding constitutional court
rulings, claiming that the constitutional court
judges who had ruled for Can Atalay’s release
had “acted unlawfully”.
In August, Celalettin Can was imprisoned to
serve a 15-month sentence. A participant in
the 2016 solidarity campaign with the now
closed Kurdish daily newspaper Özgür
Gündem, he remained in prison until his
conditional release on 19 December.

RIGHTS OF PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
The February earthquakes and conditions at
displacement sites disproportionately
impacted people with disabilities. Distribution
of food, water and other aid materials did not
adequately take into consideration their rights
and specific requirements during the
earthquake emergency response.5 People
with disabilities struggled to access quality
prostheses and assistive devices.
Government figures indicated that 70% of the
100,000 people injured in the earthquakes
would likely live with a disability.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
According to the We Will Stop Femicides
Platform, during the year men killed 315
women in acts of femicide, and 248 women
were found dead in suspicious
circumstances.
Türkiye’s highest administrative court, the
Council of State, continued to hear
applications by women’s rights organizations
to annul the 2021 presidential decision to
withdraw from the Council of Europe
Convention on preventing and combating

377

violence against women and domestic
violence (Istanbul Convention). It had not
handed down a decision by the end of the
year.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In the aftermath of the earthquakes, many
LGBTI people avoided accessing shelter,
medical care or other aid owing to concerns
about their safety.
LGBTI people faced discriminatory and
stigmatizing rhetoric that escalated further in
the run-up to the May elections. In May, the
president said, “LGBT is a poison injected
into the institution of the family. It is not
possible for us to accept that poison
especially in a country where 99% of its
people are Muslims.”
In September, for the second year running,
the state broadcasting body RTÜK endorsed
an advertisement promoting an anti-LGBTI
rights demonstration in Istanbul which
targeted so-called “LGBTI propaganda”.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
After the February earthquakes, both civilians
and state actors physically abused Syrian
refugees in racist attacks, and/or verbally
harassed them with hate speech. Syrian
refugees were evicted from emergency
camps to make room for Turkish earthquake
survivors.6
The run-up to the May presidential elections
was marred by racist and anti-refugee
rhetoric by leading candidates.
Refugees in Türkiye remained at risk of
being unlawfully returned to countries such
as Syria and Afghanistan, which would
constitute refoulement. The Ministry of
Interior announced that 28,734 Afghans had
been returned to Afghanistan in the first 10
months of the year.
In 30 cities, the Presidency of Migration
Management announced the implementation
of “Mobile Migration Points” to identify
irregular migrants through identity and
fingerprint checks. The checks involved the
use of law enforcement officials and expert
staff from the Migration Management service.

378

IMPUNITY
In January, the Diyarbakır Heavy Penal Court
No. 7 acquitted the police officer who shot
and killed Kemal Kurkut while the latter was
entering the area where Newroz festivities
were held in Diyarbakır in 2017.
In May, 19 people charged with enforced
disappearances or extrajudicial executions
between 1993 and 1996 “as part of the
activities of an armed organization
established to commit crimes” were
acquitted in Ankara.
The prosecution of three police officers and
an alleged PKK member accused of killing
human rights lawyer Tahir Elçi in 2015
continued.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
People detained for alleged looting following
the earthquakes in Türkiye were subjected to
torture and other ill-treatment by law
enforcement officials. At least one person
died in custody after being tortured; three
gendarmes were suspended on 15 February
as a result.7
In June, after the dispersal of the Istanbul
Trans Pride March, law enforcement officials
used unlawful force amounting to torture or
other ill-treatment while detaining at least five
protesters.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Türkiye faced a growing cost of living crisis
with food inflation over 72% by October, and
general inflation running at over 64% at the
end of the year. By July, 3.7 million
households living in poverty were entitled to
benefit from the government Family Support
Programme.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Türkiye remained vulnerable to the impacts of
climate change, including drought and
extreme heat, and recorded its highest ever
temperature of 49.5°C in August. The
country’s energy sector remained heavily
dependent on oil, coal and fossil gas imports.
A revised nationally determined contribution
submitted in April committed to a 41%

The State of the World’s Human Rights

reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by
2030, and to net zero by 2053. According to
Climate Action Tracker, however, this would
lead to increased emissions, and was not
consistent with limiting the global
temperature rise to 1.5°C. Türkiye opposed
the inclusion of a commitment to phase out
fossil fuels at COP28. Although the National
Energy Plan included targets for increasing
renewable energy, there was no road map to
achieve them and the plan envisaged
increasing rather than phasing out the use of
coal.
1. “Türkiye: Further information: Fully open Galatasaray Square:
Saturday Mothers/People”, 17 November
2. “Türkiye: Justice prevails as four human rights defenders finally
acquitted”, 6 June

BACKGROUND
In January the constitution was amended to
abolish the bicameral parliamentary system,
conferring ultimate power to take decisions
on domestic and foreign policy to the
People’s Council. Former president
Gurbanguly Berdymukhamedov was
confirmed as the chairperson of the People’s
Council and given the title of National Leader
of the Turkmen People.
The country remained closed to
international human rights NGOs and
independent foreign media outlets which,
together with internal censorship, greatly
constrained information gathering.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

TURKMENISTAN

The state controlled the flow of information,
strictly limiting access to the internet and
censoring any reporting on negative
developments, including economic hardship,
shortages of essential food items, the impact
of climate change and forced labour. An April
study of internet censorship by two
universities in the USA found that over
122,000 domains were blocked, including all
WordPress sites, as well as scores of news,
business and social media sites. By
deliberate policy, internet speed remained
one of the slowest and most expensive in the
world; penetration was low by international
standards, disadvantaging rural communities.

Turkmenistan

REPRESSION OF DISSENT

3. “Türkiye: Upholding sentence against Osman Kavala and four other
Gezi defendants a ‘devastating politically motivated blow’”, 29
September
4. “Türkiye: Court ruling for release of Can Atalay ‘long overdue’”, 25
October
5. Türkiye: “We All Need Dignity” – The Exclusion of Persons With
Disabilities in Türkiye’s Earthquake Response, 26 April
6. Türkiye/Syria: A Human Rights Response to the 6 February
Earthquakes, 23 February
7. “Türkiye: Police and gendarmerie commit abuses in earthquake
zone”, 5 April

The authorities continued their relentless
campaign to stifle all forms of public
criticism and peaceful dissent at home and
abroad. They discriminated against women,
girls and LGBTI people, arbitrarily
restricting their rights, freedoms and bodily
autonomy in the name of “national culture”.
Access to the internet remained strictly
controlled. Turkmenistan failed to take
meaningful action to combat climate
change. The authorities used state imposed
forced labour in cotton production.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

The authorities persisted in attempting to
suffocate all forms of peaceful dissent and
public criticism at home and abroad.
In March the UN Human Rights Committee
expressed serious concern about the
imprisonment and treatment of independent
journalist Nurgeldy Khalykov, civil society
activist and blogger Murat Dushemov and
human rights activist Mansur Mingelov. In
May Nurgeldy Khalykov and Murat
Dushemov wrote to the UN from their
detention facility in the eastern Lebap region
describing the torture and other ill-treatment
they went through. Mansur Mingelov,
suffering from advanced skeletal

379

tuberculosis, was reportedly denied access to
necessary medical treatment.
The authorities continued to persecute
activists and critics based abroad and harass
their families at home. Dursoltan Taganova,
an activist and blogger based in Türkiye,
described how officers of the Ministry for
National Security had questioned her 12year-old son in Turkmenistan about her
activities and attempted to recruit him as an
informant. They had also intimidated other
relatives in an attempt to stop her criticizing
the authorities.

DISCRIMINATION
WOMEN AND GIRLS
The authorities made no progress on
adopting a comprehensive law criminalizing
all forms of violence against women and
gender-based violence.
In June the CEDAW Committee expressed
particular concern about persistent
patriarchal attitudes in relation to genderbased violence. The committee raised
alarming reports that women and girls were
forced to “abide by gender stereotypes”, and
that their “fundamental liberties” were
restricted “in order to preserve the culture
and the nation, including through the
imposition of dress and appearance codes
and other discriminatory practices”.
LGBTI PEOPLE
In April the UN Human Rights Committee
expressed regret that the authorities had
failed to decriminalize consensual same-sex
relations. The committee was also concerned
about continuing reports of “police brutality
motivated by the sexual orientation and
gender identity of the victims”, and the
resulting climate of fear which prevented
LGBTI people from reporting their aggressors.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Turkmenistan remained almost wholly reliant
on gas and oil for energy, and subsidized
fossil fuels heavily. A major contributor to
global methane emissions, research
published in May showed Turkmenistan was
responsible for most global super emitter
events in 2022. Following international

380

pressure, the president signed a methane
reduction roadmap in June and the Global
Methane Pledge at COP28 in December. The
USA and Turkmenistan governments had
previously agreed to set up a working group
on methane mitigation with a view to
cooperate on leak detection and remedial
action.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The authorities tightly controlled the right to
freedom of peaceful assembly and sought to
clamp down on spontaneous small-scale
protests in relation to social and economic
issues such as shortages of food staples,
access to justice and healthcare.
In March police detained around 30 women
who had gathered outside the presidential
palace in the capital, Ashgabat, to raise their
concerns about police corruption directly with
the president, having failed to get their
complaints addressed by local and regional
authorities. The women were taken to a
police station, denied access to food and
water for over six hours, and forced to sign
official statements of their detention before
being released.
In April police detained 15 people following
spontaneous protests by hundreds of
demonstrators against bread shortages at a
local bread factory in the city of Mary. Police
used unnecessary and disproportionate force
to break up protesters blocking traffic on a
main road.

FORCED LABOUR
Investigations by Cotton Campaign, a
coalition of international human rights and
labour NGOs, independent trade unions and
brand and retail associations, concluded that
thousands of public sector workers were
forced to participate in the cotton harvest or
pay for others to replace them. Women were
particularly affected as they make up most of
the public sector workforce. The government
continued to reject all claims that forced
labour was used systematically, but in
September allowed medical doctors and
qualified teachers in three districts to stop
working in the cotton fields without the need

The State of the World’s Human Rights

to pay for replacements. Independent
monitors, journalists and human rights
defenders continued to document conditions
during the harvest at great personal risk.

UGANDA
Republic of Uganda
The authorities continued to severely
restrict the rights to expression, association
and peaceful assembly. The president
assented to an anti-gay law which further
criminalized consensual same-sex sexual
relations, prescribing the death penalty for
some offences. Plans to construct the East
African Crude Oil Pipeline threatened the
right to a healthy environment. Forced
evictions in the name of conservation
continued in Mount Elgon. Conversely, the
government suspended forced evictions in
the Apaa region. Uganda’s support for over
1.6 million refugees was severely
underfunded, despite the arrival of over
130,000 new refugees.

BACKGROUND
In March, Muhoozi Kainerugaba, President
Museveni’s son, announced on X (formerly
Twitter), that he would run for president in
2026, later deleting his tweet. He then
launched the MK Movement, a political
mobilization campaign, continuing in his
presidential bid. President Museveni did not
announce his intentions for the election.
In August, the Electoral Commission
launched the national strategic plan and
roadmap for the 2026 general elections.
Also in August, OHCHR, the UN human
rights office, closed in Uganda after the
government refused to renew its host
agreement. For 18 years, the office had
worked closely with civil society, rightsholders and NGOs, and had engaged with
state institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights in the country.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
In January, police in the capital, Kampala,
arrested human rights defender Bob Barigye
while he was organizing a public debate on
climate justice. He was released from
Wandegeya Police Station on police bond
after three days, charged with “obstruct[ing]
… a police officer on duty”. In June, he was
re-arrested along with Zarika Mutesi, Shamim
Naruwada and Phionah Nalusiba, also
human rights defenders, for protesting
against the fossil fuel company East African
Crude Oil Pipeline (EACOP) Ltd (see Right to
a healthy environment below). They were
taken to Kampala Central Police Station,
charged with inciting violence, and released
on police bond the next day.
On 15 September, student environmental
activists Benjamin Akiso, Wasswa Alex,
Abduh Twaib Magambo and Kajubi
Maktumin were arrested by police in
Kampala for holding a public protest. They
were detained at Luzira prison for six days on
charges of common nuisance before being
granted bail by the Buganda Road court.
Their case was pending at the end of the
year.
In April, police arrested 12 women MPs
outside parliament in Kampala as they
prepared to march to the Ministry of Internal
Affairs to deliver a petition about police use of
excessive force to disperse various meetings
organized by women MPs in their
constituencies. The women, some of whom
were injured during their arrest, were
unconditionally released hours later from the
central police station after the parliamentary
speaker intervened.
At the end of August, the opposition
National Unity Platform (NUP) party began
campaigning and mobilizing, attracting huge
crowds of supporters. In September, the
police deputy inspector general responded by
suspending NUP party gatherings and other
activities nationwide. The authorities claimed
that public order violations like traffic
accidents, including one that led to a fatality,
were being “used to incite violence, promote
sectarianism, launch illegitimate calls for
the… government’s removal… and publish

381

defamatory statements against the
President…”
On 9 October, the security forces prevented
NUP party leaders and supporters from
holding a press conference at their
headquarters. Fourteen of them, including
secretary general David Lewis Rubongoya,
spokesperson Joel Ssenyonyi and the
secretary for mobilization, Fred Nyanzi, were
briefly arrested and released unconditionally.
On 11 October, police charged 59 NUP
party supporters from Entebbe, Kajjansi and
Kawempe (an area of Kampala) for holding
an unlawful assembly and inciting violence
contrary to the Penal Code Act. Tens of NUP
leaders and supporters were arrested around
the country for protesting against the house
arrest of their party leader, Robert
Kyagulanyi, also known as Bobi Wine. Robert
Kyagulanyi was arrested on 5 October when
he arrived at Entebbe airport from tours in
Canada and South Africa. Security forces
escorted him to his home in Magere, outside
Kampala, where he remained under house
arrest for three days.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In May, the Anti-Homosexuality Act, 2023
was enacted. It introduced the death penalty
for the offence of “aggravated
homosexuality”, vaguely described as sexual
intercourse with a person over 75 or below
18 who either does not give consent, is
unable to give consent, or is a person living
with a disability or mental illness. The law
also imposes life imprisonment and a
maximum 10-year custodial sentence for
consensual same-sex sexual acts, and
attempted same-sex sexual acts, respectively;
and criminalizes the “promotion” of
“homosexuality”.
Following the enactment of the law, there
were reports of increased violence and other
violations against LGBTI people. A local NGO,
Human Rights Awareness and Promotion
Forum (HRAPF), recorded 379 cases of
violence between June and December,
including people being evicted from their
homes and villages, and physical violence or
threats of violence.

382

In August, the director of public
prosecutions directed that all cases with
charges preferred under the act should be
submitted to her office with a written legal
opinion providing further guidance before a
decision to charge is made. However, five
cases of “aggravated homosexuality” were
already being tried in courts in the Kampala,
Lugazi, Mbarara, Soroti and Wakiso districts,
and two of the accused in these cases
remained in police custody while others were
released on bond. According to HRAPF, at
least 59 people were charged with various
offences under the law by the end of the
year.
On 18 December, the constitutional court
began hearing a petition, brought by local
human rights groups, challenging the law.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
On 24 January, EACOP Ltd, owned jointly by
the Uganda National Oil Company,
TotalEnergies EP Uganda, China National
Offshore Oil Corporation Uganda and the
Tanzania Petroleum Development
Corporation, received a licence allowing it to
develop a 1,443km pipeline (known as
EACOP) from Kabaale, in the Hoima district
in western Uganda, to Tanzania’s
Chongoleani Peninsula near Tanga Port. The
project involves the construction of a 61cm
diameter heated pipeline to transport crude
oil and puts hundreds of villages in Kapapi
and Kiganja sub-counties in danger of further
forced eviction from their land (see below,
Forced evictions). The pipeline is set to pass
through human settlements and wildlife
areas, agricultural land and water sources,
and threatens the right to a clean, healthy
and sustainable environment.
On 28 February, a French civil court
dismissed a case brought in 2018 by six
NGOs from France and Uganda against
EACOP Ltd shareholder TotalEnergies. The
NGOs sought to stop the pipeline under a
2017 French due diligence law that makes
multinational companies liable for risks to the
environment and human rights arising from
their business activities at home and abroad.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

The court dismissed the case on procedural
grounds.
Meanwhile, Kenyan, Ugandan and
Tanzanian civil society groups waited for the
third year for a decision from the East African
Court of Justice, following their lawsuit
seeking a temporary injunction with the aim
of halting the construction of the pipeline. On
5 April, the court decided to reserve its
judgment after hearing arguments, including
from the East African Community secretary
general, and the Tanzanian and Ugandan
governments, that the matter was outside the
court’s jurisdiction (see Tanzania entry). On
29 November the court dismissed the lawsuit
regarding it as time barred, while ruling that
the applicants should have filed the case as
early as 2017 rather than in 2020. The civil
society groups appealed the decision on 11
December.

FORCED EVICTIONS
During the night of 10 February, security
forces forcibly evicted nearly 500 families in
Waaki North, Kapapi Central, Waaki South,
Runga and Kiryatete villages in Kapapi and
Kiganja sub-counties, Hoima district, from
their land to allow for the EACOP
construction. Security forces burned houses,
assaulted people and looted property,
including livestock and harvested crops. By
the end of the year, 11 villagers who opposed
the evictions had been arrested and
arraigned in court on various charges,
including theft, threatening violence and
malicious damage to property. In addition, at
least seven activists who protested against
the pipeline were arrested and later released,
some having spent months in detention.
The Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA)
continued to violate the rights of the
Indigenous Benet People of Mount Elgon,
eastern Uganda, through arbitrary arrests,
burning of houses and impounding domestic
animals which they claimed had strayed into
the Mount Elgon National Park. The UWA
persisted with these tactics even while
individual cases against the authority
challenging forced evictions of the Benet
were pending before the Mbale High Court.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

By the end of the year, 29 Benets had been
arbitrarily arrested and held until they paid
cash bail and other exorbitant fines for the
release of their animals; 190 cows and 260
goats were impounded.
In February, the president suspended an
eviction plan, ordered by the prime minister
against all residents of Apaa village in Amuru
district, northern Uganda, to vacate the area
by 16 May or face forced eviction. He said
the suspension was pending the formation
and approval of the Judicial Commission of
Inquiry which is expected to guide the
government in decisions over land disputes
in Apaa, a region which has been subject to
territorial disputes for decades.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Uganda continued to host the largest refugee
population in Africa, with 1,615,162 refugees
and asylum seekers in the country at the end
of the year. Over 130,000 of them arrived in
2023. New arrivals were mainly from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and South
Sudan. Others came from Somalia, Rwanda
and Burundi.
UNHCR, the UN refugee agency, said it had
received less than 30% of its USD 343.4
million funding requirement, compared to
2022 when it received at least 45% of what it
needed.

UKRAINE
Ukraine
Russian forces continued indiscriminate
attacks resulting in thousands of civilian
casualties and destruction of civilian
infrastructure, amid evidence of other
crimes under international humanitarian
law. Derogations from the rights to freedom
of expression and religion continued under
martial law. Recorded cases of domestic
violence rose sharply. New draft legislation
on civil partnerships included same-sex
relationships. The war continued to have a
devastating impact on economic and social
rights, particularly of children and older

383

people, as well as on the environment.
Serious human rights violations continued
in Russian occupied territories.

BACKGROUND
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine
continued, resulting in civilian deaths,
destruction of infrastructure, and consistently
high levels of internally displaced people and
refugees. As of November, the UN had
recorded 28,711 civilian casualties since
Russia’s full-scale invasion in February 2022,
including 10,058 deaths. A Ukrainian
counteroffensive made minimal territorial
gains, opening the prospect of a prolonged
war of attrition and raising concerns about
sustainability of military support from
Ukraine’s allies. The economy continued to
significantly contract, with a growing
dependency on foreign grants and loans. In
July Russia withdrew from the Black Sea
Grain Initiative intended to ensure stable food
prices and avert the threat of famine in lowerincome countries.
On 14 December, the European Council
decided to open EU accession negotiations
with Ukraine.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
INDISCRIMINATE ATTACKS
Russian forces continued indiscriminate
attacks hitting populated areas, resulting in
widespread civilian casualties. In some
instances, official Russian comments on the
strikes indicated that these were likely
deliberately targeted. On 5 October, at least
59 people were killed in a single missile strike
on a café in the village of Hroza, Kharkiv
region, during a memorial service for a
Ukrainian soldier. A Russian representative at
the UN spoke of the attendees as the
soldier’s “Nazi collaborators”, a reference to
the official Russian justification of its war of
aggression.
Civilian infrastructure was apparently
systematically targeted. During winter
months, Russian forces sought to further
destroy Ukraine’s energy infrastructure, in a
tactic intended to maximize civilian suffering.

384

Russia’s withdrawal from the Black Sea Grain
Initiative was accompanied by strikes on
other critical infrastructure, including grain
storage and export facilities in Odesa and
other ports.
CLUSTER MUNITIONS AND MINES
Both Russian and Ukrainian forces used
cluster munitions, and indicated no intent to
end this practice, despite the inherently
indiscriminate nature of the weapons and
lasting risks for the civilian population.
Following the provision of cluster munitions to
Ukraine by the USA, the authorities
reportedly committed not to use them in
built-up areas and to document their location
for subsequent de-mining.1 Both
antipersonnel and anti-tank landmines were
also widely used, leading to estimates that
Ukraine was the world’s most heavily mined
country.
PRISONERS OF WAR
Russia consistently denied relief
organizations access to Ukrainian prisoners
of war in Ukrainian territories it occupied.
Torture and other ill-treatment of such
prisoners were widespread, including
summary executions, mock executions,
beatings and electrocution. Some Ukrainian
prisoners of war were put on trial for alleged
war crimes, amid concerns that they were
prosecuted for mere participation in
hostilities. Prisoner of war Maksym
Butkevych, a prominent Ukrainian human
rights defender, was held incommunicado in
occupied Luhansk region before being given
13 years’ imprisonment for purported war
crimes which he could not have committed
but was forced to “confess” to on camera.2
He was forcibly disappeared after an appeal
hearing at a Moscow court where he
appeared via a video link3. He was later
reported serving his sentence in Luhansk
region in early December.
International monitors did have access to
places of internment operated by Ukraine,
and were allowed confidential interviews with
Russian prisoners of war. There was a
marked reduction in the number of reports of
abuse of such prisoners. According to the
UN, 12 Russian prisoners of war interned in

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Ukraine had complained of torture during
interrogations and evacuations before
reaching the official places of internment.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Derogation from the right to freedom of
expression, alongside other rights, remained
in place.
According to the OHCHR, the UN human
rights office, as of July, criminal proceedings
had been opened in over 2,000 cases under
Article 436-2 of the criminal code of Ukraine:
“...justification, recognition as legitimate and
denial of the armed aggression of the
Russian Federation against Ukraine and
glorification of its participants”. This
disproportionate restriction of the right to
freedom of expression had led to 443
convictions between March 2022 and
November 2023, according to Ukrainian
media, with many resulting in non-custodial
sentences. An example of this offence was
calling the war an “internal civil conflict”.
Criminal proceedings under Article 436-2
were opened in August against Yuriy
Sheliazhenko, a cofounder and leader of the
Ukrainian Pacifist Movement. An advocate of
the right to conscientious objection, he was
accused of "justifying Russian aggression
against Ukraine”. His home was searched,
and he was placed under a night curfew
pending trial.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
The Ukrainian Orthodox Church (which
remained in disputed ecclesiastical
subordination to the Russian Orthodox
Church) was regularly accused by state
authorities of remaining an agent for Russia
in its war of aggression. In March, its clergy
and non-ordained members were evicted
from the state-owned Kyiv Pechersk Lavra
monastery and in April its abbot, Metropolitan
Pavlo Lebid, was placed under house arrest
and charged under Article 436-2 and Article
161 (“violating citizens’ equality” on racial,
ethnic, religious and other grounds) of the
criminal code. The monks faced eviction
from the monastery unless they joined the

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Orthodox Church of Ukraine (subordinated to
religious authorities in Ukraine).
In October, parliament adopted in its first
reading a draft law prohibiting the operation
of religious organizations affiliated with
“associations whose centre of influence is
located in the state that has committed
armed aggression against Ukraine.”

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
According to human rights groups and official
police data, levels of domestic violence
reached the highest level on record, after
having reportedly fallen during the first
months of Russia’s full-scale invasion. Police
registered 349,355 cases of domestic
violence from January to May, compared with
231,244 cases over the same period in 2022
and 190,277 in the first five months of 2021.
The previous highest number had been
registered during the Covid-19 lockdown
measures in 2020.

OLDER PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Older people were disproportionately affected
by the conflict, killed and injured at higher
rates than any other civilians. Those
displaced struggled to access private housing
independently. Temporary shelters typically
remained physically inaccessible for older
people particularly those with a disability.
Many older people were placed in specialized
residential institutions or medical facilities
and suffered from isolation and segregation.
Hostilities were not the only reason for
displacement; many older people fled their
homes because of a de facto care crisis in
their local communities, with family members
relocating and understaffed social services
failing to cope with increased needs.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
According to UN data, as of November, 569
children had been killed since 24 February
2022 and at least 1,229 injured. No reliable
data existed as to the number of Ukrainian
children unlawfully transferred by the
occupying Russian authorities into other
occupied territories or to Russia, but it was
estimated at hundreds and possibly

385

thousands. These included children who
were orphaned or had lost contact with their
families, those from children’s institutions,
and children who travelled away from home
with parental consent for recreational
purposes but faced difficulties reuniting with
their families after the moving front line
separated them. On 17 March, the ICC
issued arrest warrants for Russia’s President
Vladimir Putin and its Commissioner for
Children’s Rights Maria Lvova-Belova for the
alleged war crime of unlawfully deporting and
transferring children from occupied areas to
Russia.4
The ongoing war continued to impact
children’s access to education, particularly
in-person teaching in government-controlled
territories. Pupils from schools without bomb
shelters and those in proximity to the front
line were taught only online. Other schools
offered a combination of online and in-person
schooling. Online schooling left pupils
dependent on an often unreliable internet
connection due to energy outages and lack of
relevant IT equipment, resulting in an
increased workload for teachers who also had
to cope with their own and the children’s warrelated trauma.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Draft legislation on registration of civil
partnerships, including for same-sex couples,
was published in March. Although opposed
by many religious organizations, it was
supported by key ministries. Civil partners,
including same-sex partners, would enjoy the
same property and inheritance rights, and
social protection as married couples. The
existing prohibition on same-sex couples
adopting children would not be lifted.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
The ongoing Russian aggression caused
huge environmental harm, including pollution
to air, water and land and the degradation of
nature, as well as undermining the prospects
of national and multilateral climate action.
Waste management infrastructure was
overwhelmed with debris and hazardous
rubbish. According to the UN, between

386

February 2022 and March 2023 there were
over 1,800 incidents of war damage which
may have caused environmental harm.
On 6 June, the Kakhovka dam in Kherson
region was destroyed in what appeared to be
a deliberate military act, widely believed to
have been committed by Russian forces. This
led to hundreds of square kilometres being
flooded, while the reservoir and thousands of
square kilometres of wetlands dried out.
Thousands of people were displaced, and
dozens were reported as dead or missing in
government-controlled areas; casualties on
the Russian-controlled left bank were not
known and may have pushed the real death
toll much higher. The occupying Russian
authorities refused humanitarian assistance
from the UN and other stakeholders, failed to
carry out organized evacuations or provide
crucial humanitarian support to civilians and
obstructed the work of volunteers, while
Russian forces continued indiscriminate
attacks on the Ukrainian-controlled right
bank during ongoing civilian evacuations.5
The breach severely harmed the biodiversity
of the region, led to chemical and waste
contamination, including the release of
hundreds of tons of machine oil, and was set
to cause long lasting ecological
consequences far beyond Ukrainian borders.
The water supply for up to 1 million people
was affected.

RUSSIAN-OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
The crackdown on rights and freedoms in
Russian-occupied territories intensified. As of
September, those not holding Russian
passports were only able to enter the
occupied territories from outside Russia
through Sheremetуevo airport in Moscow.
Individuals were forced to wait up to 24 hours
to complete verification procedures without
access to food and hygiene facilities, undergo
intrusive checks and answer questions on
whether they supported Russia’s “special
military operation” against Ukraine.
ARBITRARY DEPRIVATION OF NATIONALITY
The occupying authorities forced residents to
acquire Russian passports or be deprived of
access to healthcare, education,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

humanitarian and social support,
employment and the right to freedom of
movement.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The right to freedom of expression was
further suppressed. Any sign of disloyalty to
Russia, including possession of Ukrainerelated content on personal electronic
devices, such as exchange of messages with
family members in government-controlled
Ukraine, was monitored and penalized,
including via enforced disappearance,
arbitrary detention, interrogation, illtreatment, and threat of deportation.
Representatives of Ukrainian local authorities
were intimidated into attending public
gatherings in support of the occupation
through violence and threats against their
relatives.
ARBITRARY DETENTION AND ENFORCED
DISAPPEARANCES
More than 20,000 civilians were officially
registered by the Ukrainian authorities as
people missing due to the war and other
related “special circumstances”. Numerous
civilians initially reported as missing were
later found to be arbitrarily detained by
Russian forces in the occupied territories
because of their support for Ukraine, alleged
affiliation with Ukrainian authorities or armed
forces, or refusal to cooperate with the
occupying administrations. Many were held
incommunicado, often in unacknowledged
detention, in occupied territories or in Russia,
in a practice that amounted to enforced
disappearance.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The most common forms of torture and other
ill-treatment reported against detainees in
occupied territories included beatings, sleep
deprivation, inadequate provision of water
and food, prolonged periods in a stress
position, and denial of adequate healthcare
and personal hygiene.
RIGHT TO EDUCATION
In Russian-occupied territories all local
schools were forced to teach Russian
curricula. School attendance was fraught as
parents were threatened with having their
children taken away if they did not attend

The State of the World’s Human Rights

school or if the use of online platforms to
access Ukrainian schooling was detected on
electronic devices.6 A new history textbook
introduced in September was a blatant
attempt to unlawfully indoctrinate
schoolchildren, violating children’s rights to
appropriate and quality education.7 Parents
and pupils were forced to attend propaganda
events at schools, and write letters of support
to members of the Russian forces.
UNFAIR TRIALS
Individuals detained in Russian-occupied
territories were subjected to hearings by
unrecognized courts, and had their fair trial
rights otherwise violated. Denial of access to
legal counsel of one’s choice was common,
especially in politically motivated cases.
Relatives were denied news about their loved
ones, and often had to rely on local lawyers,
paying them considerable fees to visit
detention facilities to obtain information on
those detained. The practice of using courtappointed lawyers who failed to act in the
best interest of their clients was common.
Judges accepted inadmissible evidence,
including forced “confessions”, when
convicting individuals under politically
motivated charges.
After conviction, numerous individuals were
unlawfully transferred to Russia to serve their
sentence. There was no information on their
whereabouts for months while in transit and
the final destination was often remote.
CRIMEA
The territory of the occupied peninsula was
regularly targeted by Ukrainian strikes against
claimed military objectives. In July, an
explosion damaged the bridge connecting
Crimea with Russia, reportedly killing two
people and injuring a child.
The occupying authorities continued to
crack down on the rights to freedom of
expression, peaceful assembly and
association. Representatives of the Crimean
Tatar community and minority faith-based
groups, and individuals opposing the war,
were subjected to dismissal from work, fines,
increasingly frequent, intrusive and
deliberately destructive house searches,
arbitrary arrest and imprisonment.

387

The persecution of human rights lawyers
continued. In April, Lilia Hemedzhy was
disbarred again in retaliation for defending
members of the Crimean Tatar community.8
1. “Ukraine: US transfer of cluster munitions to Ukraine undermines
international efforts to safeguard civilians from indiscriminate
weapons”, 7 July
2. “Ukraine: Russia’s reprisals against prominent Ukrainian human
rights defender who joined the Armed Forces of Ukraine”, 17 August
3. “Russian Federation: Authorities must disclose whereabouts of
Maksym Butkevych following enforced disappearance”, 7 November
4. “Russia: ICC’s arrest warrant against Putin a step towards justice for
victims of war crimes in Ukraine”, 17 March
5. “Ukraine: ‘Callous disregard for human life’ of Russian forces’
response to Kakhovka dam destruction compounded by its disastrous
effects upstream”, 15 June
6. “Ukraine/Russia: Children’s futures under attack as Russian
aggression in Ukraine continues to restrict schooling”, 11 December
7. “Ukraine/Russia: New history textbook is a blatant attempt to
unlawfully indoctrinate school children in Russia and Russianoccupied Ukrainian territories”, 1 September
8. “Russian Federation/Ukraine: Further information: Human rights
lawyer disbarred in Crimea: Lilia Hemedzhy”, 24 April

UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES
United Arab Emirates
Authorities continued to unduly restrict the
rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly. The United Arab
Emirates (UAE) failed to meet its
commitments on policies to combat climate
change. Migrant outdoor workers still lacked
adequate protection from extreme summer
heat. Authorities continued to arbitrarily
detain 26 prisoners of conscience, and
denied or severely restricted some
prisoners’ communication with their
families. Authorities launched a new mass
trial of over 80 Emiratis.

BACKGROUND
In February, the UAE hosted the 2023
International Defence Exhibition &
Conference at which states, including Israel,

388

Russia and the USA, gathered to sell
weapons.
From 30 November to 12 December, the
UAE hosted the 28th annual global
Conference of Parties (COP) to the UN
Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC), referred to as “COP28”, in Dubai.
The UAE appointed the head of its Abu
Dhabi National Oil Company (ADNOC),
Sultan Al Jaber, to manage COP28, raising a
conflict of interest.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Authorities continued to hold at least 26
prisoners of conscience solely because of
their expression of their beliefs.
Throughout the year, the Abu Dhabi Judicial
Department ran a social media campaign
using the slogan, “Your freedom stops at the
boundaries of the law.” UAE law imposes a
mandatory minimum 15-year prison
sentence for “damag[ing] the reputation or
prestige of the President”, as well as life
imprisonment for involvement in a
demonstration “with the aim of ... infringing
on public order”.
In April, the Emirati government said there
would be “safe spaces where all voices may
be heard” at COP28, but took no steps to
amend its repressive legislation and policies.
Neither the UNFCCC Secretariat nor the
UAE authorities published the Host Country
Agreement – the legal framework governing
COP28 – making it impossible for activists
attending to know what protections existed
for actions and comments made in the UNcontrolled Blue Zone once they left that
area.1 Within the Blue Zone, limits on civil
society were unusually restrictive, while
outside the Blue Zone, the UAE’s prohibitions
and criminalization of any dissent remained
in effect, creating an atmosphere of
intimidation.2
In May, the federal Office of Public
Prosecution warned that anyone using “curse
words” about public sector employees, a
crime punishable by imprisonment under the
Code of Crimes and Punishments, would be
subject to prosecution.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT

ARBITRARY DETENTION

In July, the government announced a revised
Nationally Determined Contribution that
improved its previous target for reducing its
carbon emissions. However, the UAE’s
actions and policies remained out of line with
its stated commitment to keep climate
change within the internationally agreed limit
of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels. For
instance, ADNOC, one of the world’s largest
producers of hydrocarbons, announced plans
to aggressively expand its fossil fuel
production.3
The UAE remained extremely vulnerable to
the impacts of climate change, including
increased water scarcity and extreme heat.
According to the UN Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, extreme wet-bulb
temperatures (a broader measure of heat
than air temperature) were expected to
approach, and possibly exceed, the
physiological threshold for human
adaptability in the sub-region to which the
UAE belongs.

Even though 23 out of 26 prisoners of
conscience detained solely for exercising
their human rights had completed their
prison sentences by the end of the year, the
authorities kept them in prison under a law
authorizing indefinite “counter-extremism
counselling”.
In May, the authorities asked Jordan to
arrest and deport Emirati-Turkish national
Khalaf al-Rumaithi to the UAE. Khalaf alRumaithi, a victim of the “UAE94” mass trial
of 94 defendants in 2012 to 2013, had lived
in exile for a decade in Türkiye, which
granted him asylum and citizenship. On 7
May, he travelled to Jordan to look for an
Arabic school for his son and was arrested on
arrival. Ten days later, Jordanian security
services deported him while a judicial ruling
on the extradition request was pending (see
Jordan entry).4 He was imprisoned on arrival
and was still held in detention at the end of
the year.
On 5 June, State Security officers arrested
Mansoor al-Ahmadi, one of only two UAE94
prisoners released in 2021. He remained
detained incommunicado at an unknown
location until he appeared in court at the new
mass trial on 7 December. Previously, he had
been held for a year and a half beyond his
prison sentence for “counselling”, but was
released after authorities recorded him in an
unpublished “confession” video.
On 7 December, during COP28, the UAE
began a new mass trial of 84 defendants.
Among them were human rights defenders
and prisoners of conscience, including
Ahmed Mansoor and Mohamed al-Roken,
who had been in prison for years on
“terrorism” charges.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Over 85% of people living in the UAE are
non-nationals, most of them labourers.
Despite extreme summer heat conditions,
the UAE continued to hold the laxest safety
standards for outdoor work in the Arab Gulf
region. The Emirati government continued to
limit its protection measures to a ban on
outdoor physical labour of just 2.5 hours per
day during the peak three months of
summer, even though weather data showed
that outdoor workers faced significant health
dangers from the heat for at least half the
year and for more than 2.5 hours a day.
From October, the UAE required all private
sector workers to pay into a national
unemployment programme. Many migrants,
who comprise the vast majority of the privatesector workforce, therefore became eligible
for unemployment benefits. However,
domestic workers were excluded from
unemployment benefits. The UAE still did not
provide the protection of a minimum wage for
migrant domestic and private sector workers.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
For the seventh consecutive year, authorities
held Ahmed Mansoor in prolonged and
indefinite solitary confinement, without
adequate access to personal hygiene items
and with only two to three visits with
immediate family members per year in
contravention of the absolute prohibition of
torture under international law.

389

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
Authorities continued to deny UAE94
prisoners any communication with family
members living in exile. From the end of
June, authorities stopped all calls with family,
even those inside the UAE, for at least 11
UAE94 prisoners. Authorities also severely
restricted the communication of seven
Lebanese prisoners with their families in
Lebanon, with calls sometimes restricted to
two minutes.

and prosecutions of historic human rights
violations during the Northern Ireland
Troubles. Minimum service levels during
industrial action were imposed in various
sectors.

BACKGROUND

1. “Global: Pledge to allow ‘peaceful assembly’ at COP28 highlights the
UAE’s lack of freedoms”, 3 August

The UN Human Rights Council adopted the
UK’s UPR Outcome Report in March. The
new Bill of Rights Bill, proposed in 2022 as a
replacement for the Human Rights Act, was
formally withdrawn, but the Human Rights
Act remained under sustained attack by its
piecemeal disapplication in other legislation
and hostile government rhetoric. The UK’s
membership of the European Convention on
Human Rights became the subject of
increasing political pressure. Conversely, the
devolved Scottish government launched a
consultation on a new Scottish Human Rights
Bill to expand the legal protection of human
rights in Scotland.

2. “Global: What happened at COP28? Essential need-to-knows”, 14
December

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT

DEATH PENALTY
In March, the Emirati government pardoned
Israeli Arab citizen Fidaa Kiwan; she had
received a death sentence for drug
possession in 2022.
The courts continued to impose death
sentences.

3. “Climate: UAE state oil company’s expansion plans prove chief
executive is unfit to lead COP28 climate talks”, 13 February
4. “UAE: Authorities must ensure man forcibly deported is safe, afforded
fair trial rights”, 18 May

UNITED KINGDOM
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The UK government continued to pursue a
policy agenda that breached its
international human rights commitments
and curtailed human rights protections.
People seeking asylum and other migrants
were particularly targeted, along with
protesters. New government legislation
further eroded the freedom of assembly and
expression. Police faced findings of
institutional racism and other forms of
discrimination. Abortion was decriminalized
in Northern Ireland, but access to abortion
services was still hindered. In the rest of
the UK, abortion remained criminalized
apart from lawful exceptions. Legislation
was passed terminating investigations into

390

In September, the government announced a
delay to, or abandonment of, key policies
intended to contribute towards reaching net
zero by 2050. A ban on the sale of new petrol
and diesel cars from 2030 was delayed by
five years to 2035. The phase-out of liquid
petroleum gas boilers for residential heating
was also delayed from 2026 to 2035.
Requirements on residential landlords to
increase the insulation of their properties by
2028 were scrapped. In November, the
government announced plans to pass new
legislation permitting fossil fuel companies to
bid for new oil and gas drilling licences on an
annual basis. These bidding rounds would
proceed so long as, in a given year, the UK
was predicted to import more fossil fuel
products than it produces domestically and
the carbon emissions produced by the new
domestic extraction were less than the
equivalent emissions from imported fuel. The
government continued to insist that it would
meet the 2050 net zero target, although
NGOs claimed its policies were not on track
to meet this.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
In May, parliament passed the Public Order
Act, furthering a legislative crackdown on
peaceful protest that started with the 2022
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act.
The Public Order Act criminalized various
forms of peaceful protest, such as “locking
on”, expanded police stop-and-search
powers, created protest banning orders, and
gave the Home Secretary powers to seek civil
injunctions against peaceful protesters.
In June, the Public Order Act 1986 (Serious
Disruption to the Life of the Community)
Regulations were passed. This secondary
legislation expanded the circumstances in
which police can impose conditions on
protests, backed by prison sentences.
Conditions can be anything police consider
necessary to prevent “serious disruption”,
defined in the regulations as an obstruction
causing “more than minor hindrance to dayto-day activities”.
In May, dozens of peaceful protesters were
arrested at and around the coronation of King
Charles III, including pre-emptive arrests.
The majority of charges were subsequently
dropped.
Arrests, prosecutions and imprisonment of
peaceful environmental protesters continued
throughout 2023. In some instances,
protesters charged with offences were
prevented by judges from referencing climate
change or other environmental concerns in
their defence to the jury. Those who ignored
such orders faced prosecution for contempt
of court and prison sentences.
Following the Hamas attacks in Israel on 7
October, and the subsequent Israeli
bombardment and ground invasion of Gaza,
regular large-scale, non-violent protests
occurred calling for a ceasefire. The then
Home Secretary and other government
ministers sought to pressure police to ban
these protests, characterizing them as “hate
marches”. Police leaders responded that they
lacked the legal powers to ban the protests.
The government indicated its intention to
legislate to further expand policing powers to
intervene against non-violent protests.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Some people in the UK on temporary visas
had their leave to remain curtailed because
of their involvement in pro-Palestine protests.

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
In June, the High Court rejected a judicial
review challenge brought by Campaign
Against Arms Trade (CAAT) against the
government’s decision to renew arms sales to
Saudi Arabia in the context of ongoing
conflict in Yemen. The court ruled that the
government had not acted irrationally in
renewing the sales.
NGOs expressed concern over continued
transfers of components for combat aircraft
to Israel. In December, an application for
judicial review of export licences for military
equipment capable of being used by Israeli
forces in Gaza was lodged by a group of
NGOs. The case was ongoing at the end of
the year.

DISCRIMINATION
In January, the UK government blocked the
Gender Recognition Reform Act passed by
the Scottish Parliament from becoming law.
The devolved Scottish government
challenged this decision in the Court of
Session, but lost the challenge in December.
In February, the government published the
Shawcross Review into the “Prevent” strand
of the government’s anti-terrorism strategy.
The review made many recommendations,
including that Prevent should focus more
greatly on what the review referred to as
“non-violent Islamist extremism” and narrow
its approach to what it referred to as “the
Extreme Right Wing”. Amnesty International’s
own research into Prevent found
discrimination and interference with freedom
of thought and expression.1
In March, the government-commissioned
Casey Report on the standards of behaviour
and internal culture at the Metropolitan
Police was published. It found numerous
issues, including institutional racism, sexism
and homophobia. In May, the outgoing Chief
Constable of Police Scotland gave a speech
in which he admitted that institutional racism,

391

sexism, misogyny and discrimination existed
in the police force.
In March and June, respectively, the
Children’s Commissioner for England and
Wales and the Northern Ireland Policing
Board each published research into the use
of strip-searching by police against children.
The Children’s Commissioner’s report found,
among many other concerns, that Black
children were up to six times more likely to
be strip-searched than other children.
Following 7 October, reports of antisemitic
and Islamophobic hate crimes escalated
dramatically. Between 1 October and 13
November, the Metropolitan Police reported
that 779 antisemitic offences were recorded,
an increase of 1,200% on the same period
the year before. In the same period, 343
Islamophobic offences were reported, a
236% increase.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Despite being decriminalized in Northern
Ireland, abortion remained criminalized in
England and Wales, and Scotland, subject to
lawful exceptions determined by doctors. In
2023, six women were charged with illegal
abortion offences. In July, a woman was
sentenced to a 14-month suspended prison
sentence after pleading guilty to selfadministering an abortion outside the legal
time limits.
Ongoing barriers obstructed access to
abortion services in Northern Ireland
following decriminalization, including multiple
failings by the devolved government, underresourced and understaffed services,
conscience-based refusals, misinformation
and pervasive stigma.2

IMPUNITY
In September, the Northern Ireland Troubles
(Legacy and Reconciliation) Bill was passed
into law. The act effectively created an
amnesty and terminated all inquests,
inquiries and investigations into killings and
other Troubles-related human rights
violations. They were to be replaced by a
light-touch review by a new Independent
Commission for Reconciliation and

392

Information Recovery. The act was widely
criticized by victims, political parties in
Northern Ireland and the government of the
Irish Republic, as well as a range of
international human rights monitors. The act
was met with immediate legal challenges by
victims and families. In December, the Irish
government announced its intention to
launch an inter-state case against the UK at
the European Court of Human Rights,
arguing that the act’s provisions breach the
European Convention on Human Rights.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In June, the “Illegal Migration Act” passed
into law. The act and government rhetoric
around it were in conflict with the UN
Refugee Convention and the European
Convention on Human Rights. The act
banned the government from processing
asylum claims made by people who had
arrived without prior permission, and
required the government to expel them and
never permit them lawful residence in the
UK. This reinforced an existing policy of
refusing to process asylum claims by people
deemed to have arrived irregularly via
countries perceived as safe. The policy
affected the majority of asylum claimants in
the UK.
In November, the Supreme Court ruled that
the government’s policy of expelling people
seeking asylum in the UK to Rwanda was
unlawful. In response, the government signed
a new treaty with the Rwandan government
and tabled legislation in parliament requiring
courts to treat Rwanda as a safe country,
disapplying large parts of the Human Rights
Act and other rights-protecting legal
instruments and substantially limiting the
ability of the courts to intervene. The
legislative process was ongoing at the end of
the year.
In September, a government-commissioned
inquiry into abuses of people detained at
Brook House Immigration Removal Centre
was published. The report found a prevailing
culture of abuse, including 19 instances of
inhuman or degrading treatment of detained
people by staff within a five-month period.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Nevertheless, the 2023 “Illegal Migration
Act” granted new powers to detain people for
immigration purposes without effective
judicial oversight.
Hostile government and media rhetoric
against migrants increased throughout the
year. In September, the then Home Secretary
singled out trafficking survivors, and gay and
women refugees. Safeguards for migrant
survivors of human trafficking and
unaccompanied children were removed or
reduced through the “Illegal Migration Act”.
At the same time, steep increases to visa fees
were imposed, further impoverishing
migrants in the UK.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
In response to large-scale public sector
strikes in schools, universities, hospitals and
railway services, in July, parliament passed
the Strikes (Minimum Service Levels) Act,
which potentially breached the right to
freedom of association. The act gave
ministers broad powers to determine levels of
service that must be maintained during
industrial action in a range of broadly defined
sectors, such as “health”, “education” and
“transport”. Workers failing to comply with
“work notices” would lose their protection
against unfair dismissal. The act also
provided that a union failing to ensure named
members broke the strike would face severe
financial penalties.
1. This is the Thought Police: The Prevent Duty and its Chilling Effect on
Human Rights, 16 November
2. Legal but Not Local: Barriers to Accessing Abortion Services in
Northern Ireland, 7 December

UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA
United States of America
Discrimination and violence against LGBTI
people were widespread and anti-LGBTI
legislation increased. Bills were introduced

The State of the World’s Human Rights

to address reparations regarding slavery and
its legacies. Multiple states implemented
total bans on abortion or severely limited
access to it. Gender-based violence
disproportionately affected Indigenous
women. Access to the USA for asylum
seekers and migrants was still fraught with
obstacles, but some nationalities continued
to enjoy Temporary Protected Status. Moves
were made to restrict the freedom to protest
in a number of states. Black people were
disproportionately affected by the use of
lethal force by police. No progress was
made in the abolition of the death penalty,
apart from in Washington. Arbitrary and
indefinite detention in the US naval base
Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, continued. Despite
extensive gun violence, no further firearm
reform policies were considered, but
President Biden did announce the creation
of the White House Office of Gun Violence
Prevention. The USA continued to use
lethal force in countries around the world.
Black people, other racialized groups and
low-income people bore the brunt of the
health impacts of the petrochemical
industry, and the use of fossil fuels
continued unabated.

DISCRIMINATION
Individuals experienced excessive violence
based on their actual or perceived sexual
orientation or gender identity, especially
transgender people from racialized groups.
LGBTI people were nine times more likely
than non-LGBTI people to be victims of
violent hate crimes. Only 54% of LGBTI
adults lived in states with hate crime laws
covering sexual orientation and gender
identity and expression.
The passage of anti-LGBTI laws at the state
level increased dramatically. In 2023, 84
anti-LGBTI bills were enacted, a fourfold
increase on 2022. A growing number of laws
were enacted under the claim of religious
freedom that curtailed or effectively
eliminated the rights of LGBTI individuals.
Congress introduced four resolutions or bills
that addressed reparations and truth and
healing commissions regarding chattel

393

slavery and Indian boarding schools and their
legacies. The descendants of enslaved
Africans, African Americans and Indigenous
Peoples continued to live with
intergenerational trauma, as well as the
detrimental economic and material impacts
of the legacy of slavery and colonialism,
without reparations.
Following the Hamas attacks in Israel on 7
October, and the subsequent Israeli
bombardment and ground invasion of Gaza,
antisemitic and Islamophobic incidents
against people who were or were perceived to
be Jewish, Muslim, Israeli or Arab increased
exponentially.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Following the 2022 US Supreme Court
decision that ended federal protections
around the right to abortion, 15 states
implemented total bans on abortion or bans
with extremely limited exceptions, impacting
millions of people of reproductive age. Many
other states implemented six-week, 12-week,
or 15-20-week bans. Laws changed quickly
and faced complicated challenges, creating a
culture of uncertainty for many seeking
abortion care. Multiple states sought to
criminalize, or had criminalized, medication
abortion, travelling out of state to receive
abortion care, or assisting someone in a state
with an abortion ban on travelling to receive
abortion care.1 In November, voters in Ohio
passed a state constitutional amendment to
protect access to abortion.
The USA continued to impose multiple
restrictions on funding for abortion, even in
states where abortion was legal, which
disproportionately impacted Black and other
racialized women. The federal Hyde
Amendment continued to block Medicaid
funding (a government-funded programme
that provides health coverage for limited
categories of people on low incomes) for
abortion services, placing an unnecessary
financial burden on pregnant people seeking
abortion, particularly racialized groups and
low-income people.

394

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN)
women faced highly disproportionate rates of
sexual violence. According to the most recent
government data available from 2016,
approximately 56% of AI/AN women had
experienced sexual violence – more than
twice the national average – and 84% had
experienced some type of violence. A 2018
survey found that Alaska Native women were
2.8 times more likely to experience sexual
violence than non-Indigenous women.
Among the AI/AN women who had
experienced sexual violence, the 2016 data
shows that 96% had experienced sexual
violence by at least one non-Indigenous
perpetrator. US law continued to restrict the
prosecutorial jurisdiction of Tribes, which
prevented their ability to prosecute nonIndigenous perpetrators of violence against
Indigenous women. AI/AN survivors also
continued to face barriers in accessing postrape care, including access to a forensic
examination, which is necessary if a criminal
case is to be brought against the perpetrator.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Following the termination of immigration
policy Title 42, the USA implemented new
migration measures that continued to
drastically limit access to asylum at the USMexico border. These included an asylum
ban that presumed ineligibility for asylum
unless the individual was able to meet one of
three exceptions and mandated the use of
the CBP One mobile application (launched
by US Customs and Border Protection in
2020) to schedule asylum appointments at
specific ports of entry.2 CBP One
appointments were limited, resulting in
asylum seekers being stranded in inhumane
conditions at the border, where they were
targets of violence and racism, especially
women, unaccompanied children and Black
asylum seekers.
The USA and Canada expanded the
application of the Safe Third Country
Agreement to both countries’ entire land
borders, including waterways.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

The administration extended Temporary
Protected Status for Haitian, Honduran,
Nepalese, Nicaraguan, Somalian, South
Sudanese, Sudanese, Ukrainian, Venezuelan
and Yemeni nationals, extending work
authorization and protection from removal
from the USA. A parole process was
instituted for Cubans, Haitians, Nicaraguans
and Venezuelans, which provided travel
authorization for up to 30,000 individuals
from these countries to come to the USA
each month with US-based sponsors.
Approximately 251,000 people were granted
travel authorization from January to
September.
Congress did not vote on the Afghan
Adjustment Act, which would have provided
pathways to permanent residency status for
Afghan evacuees.
Authorities continued a system of arbitrary
mass immigration detention, surveillance and
electronic monitoring. The for-profit industry
continued to use private prisons to detain
people seeking safety.
State authorities instituted new
transportation schemes to transport asylum
seekers from border states into the interior of
the USA. Cities struggled to provide adequate
shelter and services to arriving asylum
seekers, with growing populations of asylum
seekers unhoused or housed in inappropriate
settings such as police stations or congregate
shelters.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Sixteen states introduced 23 bills restricting
the right to protest, with five bills enacted in
four states. Many of the bills would
criminalize specific forms of protest, such as
protests near fossil fuel pipelines, or increase
penalties for existing crimes, such as “riot” or
blocking roadways. In Mississippi, organizers
were required to obtain written permission
from state law enforcement before holding a
protest near the Mississippi statehouse or
other government buildings, enabling state
officials to approve or disallow protests,
including those against the actions of state
officials. North Carolina heightened penalties

The State of the World’s Human Rights

for existing “riot” offences and for protests
near pipelines.
Georgia charged 61 people with violating
the state’s Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt
Organizations Act with their protests against
the construction of a law enforcement and
fire department training facility, referred to as
“Cop City”. Many were also charged under a
vague and broad domestic terrorism law.
After 7 October, regular large-scale, nonviolent protests occurred across the country
calling for a ceasefire between Israel and
Hamas and for the US government to cease
providing munitions to the Israeli
government.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
According to media sources, police shot and
killed 1,153 people in 2023. Black people
were disproportionately impacted by the use
of lethal force, comprising nearly 18.5% of
deaths from police use of firearms, despite
representing approximately 13% of the
population.
Following a visit by the UN International
Independent Expert Mechanism to Advance
Racial Justice in the Context of Law
Enforcement, the delegation called on the
USA to collect, compile, analyse and publish
data, disaggregated by race or ethnic origin,
on direct interactions by the population with
law enforcement and the criminal justice
system. It also required the USA to ensure
accountability in all cases of excessive use of
force and other human rights violations by
law enforcement officials, through prompt,
effective and independent criminal
investigations, with a view to holding
perpetrators accountable.
On 18 January, a multi-agency law
enforcement operation led by Georgia State
Patrol officers started to clear encampments
of Defend the Forest activists, who had been
camped in the forest on the outskirts of
Atlanta, Georgia, since late 2021 to prevent
the development of Cop City. Official
accounts claimed officers came across a tent
and verbally ordered the person inside to exit.
Officers claimed that the person inside the
tent, Manuel Esteban (Tortuguita) Páez

395

Terán, an environmental human rights
defender, shot at the officers, allegedly
injuring a state trooper, before the officers
returned fire and killed them. An
independent autopsy revealed that Páez
Terán had been shot 57 times and failed to
find gunpowder residue on their hands.

DEATH PENALTY
Despite a moratorium on federal executions
remaining in place, the Department of Justice
continued to defend existing federal death
sentences and sought reinstatement of death
sentences on appeal and the imposition of
new ones at trial. Two federal abolition bills
were reintroduced in both houses of
Congress, but neither was voted on.
In Alabama, in February, the Department of
Corrections completed a review of its lethal
injection process following a four-month
moratorium, allowing the resumption of
executions. In March, Idaho enacted a law
authorizing the use of firing squads as a
method of execution. In April, Florida
enacted a law requiring only eight of 12
jurors to vote for a death sentence, the lowest
threshold in the USA. In August, Alabama
also finalized its protocols for executions by
gas asphyxiation, a method found by UN
human rights bodies to violate the prohibition
of torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment. The
Alabama Legislature introduced but failed to
pass a bill that would require unanimous
juries to sentence a person to death and
would retroactively apply a 2017 law
abolishing judicial overrides of jury decisions
on death sentences.
Washington officially abolished the state’s
death penalty, after the state Supreme Court
had declared the statute arbitrary and racially
biased in 2018.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Thirty Muslim men remained arbitrarily and
indefinitely detained in the US detention
facility in Guantánamo Bay, in violation of
international law. Four individuals were
transferred to third countries in 2023. Sixteen
of the remaining detainees have been cleared

396

for transfer, some for over a decade, without
progress. Congress continued to block the
transfer of any Guantánamo detainee to the
USA, which meant the administration had to
arrange for transfer to third countries where
the detainees’ human rights would be
respected.
There continued to be no accountability,
redress or adequate medical treatment for
the many detainees who have been
subjected to torture and other ill-treatment
and/or enforced disappearance.
Despite the US Supreme Court ruling in
2008 that Guantánamo detainees have a
right to habeas corpus, detainees continued
to be denied hearings. The US government’s
“global war on terror” framework, which
continued to defy international law,
hampered the ability of federal courts to
order the release of detainees. Even
favourable rulings in federal courts did not
result in the immediate release of detainees.
Eight detainees, including five men accused
of participating in the 11 September 2001
attacks, continued to face charges in the
military commission system, in breach of
international law and standards relating to fair
trials, and could face the death penalty if
convicted. The use of capital punishment in
these cases, after proceedings that did not
meet international standards, would
constitute arbitrary deprivation of life.
Prolonged plea negotiations for some of the
remaining 30 detainees came to a stalemate
in September after the Biden administration
rejected conditions proposed by the five men
facing trial for the 11 September 2001
attacks. As a result of the systemic use of
torture, and due to the dysfunction and lack
of fundamental fairness of the offshore
commission system, the USA’s failure to hold
anyone accountable for the 11 September
attacks persisted.

RIGHT TO LIFE AND SECURITY OF THE
PERSON
At least 48,000 people were killed by gun
violence in 2022, the most recent year for
which data exists. Approximately 132 people
died each day of 2022 from a firearm-related

The State of the World’s Human Rights

injury. Such violence was perpetuated by
ongoing, virtually unfettered access to
firearms, spurred by a surge in gun sales
during the Covid-19 pandemic, a lack of
comprehensive gun safety laws (including
effective regulation of firearm acquisition,
possession and use), and a failure to invest in
adequate gun violence prevention and
intervention programmes.
There were more than 650 incidents where
four or more people were shot in 2023. In
January, a man in Monterey Park, California,
opened fire, killing 11 people and injuring
nine at a Lunar New Year celebration. In
March, a man killed three children and three
adults at a Christian elementary school in
Nashville, Tennessee. In April, a man in
Cleveland, Texas, killed five people, including
a nine-year-old boy, in a neighbour’s house
after they complained about noise from him
firing guns on his property. In May, a man
killed eight people and wounded seven at a
shopping mall in Dallas. These examples
demonstrated the US government’s
continued failure to enact evidence-based
firearm regulations, undermining human
rights across the country.
Following the passage of the first law
regulating firearm possession in 2022,
Congress failed to consider further firearm
reform policies. As a result, President Biden
announced the creation of the first-ever
White House Office of Gun Violence
Prevention in September. The office will be
overseen by the vice president and staffed
with gun violence prevention experts.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
The USA continued to use lethal force in
countries around the world and withheld
information regarding the legal and policy
standards and criteria applied by US forces
to the use of lethal force.
The administration persisted in its denial of
well-documented cases of civilian deaths and
harm, and failed to provide truth, justice and
reparation for civilian killings in the past. Over
the past decade, NGOs, UN experts and the
media have documented potentially unlawful
US drone strikes that have caused significant

The State of the World’s Human Rights

civilian harm, in some cases violating the
right to life and amounting to extrajudicial
executions. In September, the Biden
administration established the Civilian Harm
Incident Response Guidance system to
compel US State Department officials to
investigate and potentially penalize incidents
when a US arms recipient is suspected of
using US-made weapons to injure or kill
civilians.
US-made Joint Direct Attack Munitions were
used by the Israeli military in two deadly,
unlawful air strikes on homes full of civilians
in the occupied Gaza Strip in October. These
air strikes were either direct attacks on
civilians or civilian objects or indiscriminate
attacks and should be investigated as war
crimes. The continued supply of munitions to
Israel violates US laws and policies regarding
the transfer and sale of arms, including its
Conventional Arms Transfer Policy and
Civilian Harm Incident Response Guidance,
which together are meant to prevent arms
transfers that risk facilitating or otherwise
contributing to civilian harm and to violations
of human rights or international humanitarian
law.3
After much urging by Amnesty International
and others, the Department of Defense
revised its Laws of War Manual to clarify that,
when there is doubt about whether a
potential target of lethal force is a civilian or a
combatant, the law requires the military to
assume that the target is a civilian. Previous
military policy did not accurately characterize
this principle and may have led to many of
the civilian killings by US forces in recent
years.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
The USA was the largest exporter of liquified
natural gas in the world between January and
June. President Biden approved an oil drilling
project in North Slope Alaska, which is
anticipated to produce up to 180,000 barrels
per day, igniting protests from environmental
groups, and local and Indigenous
communities. The president also prohibited
new leasing on 10 million acres (4.05 million

397

hectares) in Alaska’s 23 million-acre National
Petroleum Reserve.
In April, the president pledged to contribute
USD 1 billion to the Green Climate Fund. His
2024 budget proposal included “[USD] 4.3
billion in direct and indirect climate finance
from State and USAID accounts and [USD]
1.4 billion in direct climate finance from
Treasury accounts”. Despite these pledges,
the USA’s climate finance contributions
remained critically insufficient compared to
its fair share.
In August, a Montana state court ruled for
the first time that Montana’s pro-fossil fuel
environmental policies had physically and
mentally harmed 16 plaintiffs, aged five to
22, and had breached their constitutional
right to a “clean and healthful environment”.4
The court struck down two state laws that
prevented courts and agencies from
considering the climate impacts of proposed
projects.
The USA continued to supply the world with
plastics manufactured from fossil fuels, and
frontline communities bore the brunt of the
impact, which disproportionately affected
Black people, other racialized groups, lowincome people and those with limited English
proficiency. According to a 2021 report, the
most recent year for which data was
available, people living within three miles of
petrochemical clusters earned 28% less than
the average US household and were 67%
more likely to be Black, Indigenous and
racialized people. Exposure to pollutants
emitted in the production of petrochemicals
was linked to several health impacts
commonly reported by frontline communities,
especially among children, including high
cancer rates, asthma and respiratory issues.
In May, a chemical fire erupted at the Shell
Chemicals Deer Park Plant in Texas near the
Houston Ship Channel, exacerbating
community exposure to harmful pollutants. In
August, Texas filed a lawsuit against Shell
claiming that the chemical fire had caused
environmental damage from airborne
contaminants and waste that flowed into
nearby waterways. The Houston Ship
Channel has more than 400 petrochemical

398

plants. A recent analysis of zip codes
corresponding to life expectancy
demonstrated that those living in the eastern
Houston metropolitan area near the Channel
could have a lower life expectancy of more
than 15 years compared with those living in
the more affluent western region.
1. “USA: One year on, overturning of Roe vs. Wade has fueled human
rights crisis", 24 June
2. USA: Mandatory Use of CBP One Application Violates the Right to
Seek Asylum, 7 May
3. “Israel/OPT: US-made munitions killed 43 civilians in two
documented Israeli air strikes in Gaza – new investigation”, 5
December
4. “Global: Ruling in favour of activists in US climate lawsuit sets
historic human rights-based precedent”, 16 August

URUGUAY
Eastern Republic of Uruguay
Threats to the media’s freedom of
expression persisted and obstacles in
access to public information remained.
Record rates of imprisonment resulted in
overcrowding and inhumane prison
conditions. Deaths in prisons remained a
concern. Some military personnel were
prosecuted for crimes against humanity
committed in the past, but no substantive
progress was made in investigations into
forced disappearances. Uruguay continued
to be a hostile country for girls and women;
femicides increased. Barriers to public
mental health services remained. The
quality of drinking water was a concern.
Overall, Uruguay continued showing signs
of a weakening of the system of rights
guarantees.

BACKGROUND
Following the prosecution of the president’s
former chief of security in February, for
crimes of criminal association, the indictment
of a former company executive for the illegal
surveillance of two senators raised concerns
about improper use of state security
apparatus. The participation of authorities

The State of the World’s Human Rights

and officials of the Ministry of the Interior in
the provision of information was being
investigated.
The government failed to take effective
action to address violent crime, as indicated
by the rise in homicides in 2023, according
to the UN Office on Crime and Drugs Global
Study on Homicide 2023.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

Deteriorating detention conditions had a
negative impact on the quality of life of
persons deprived of their liberty. In 2023, 17
inmates were murdered in custody.
In September, 55 women deprived of their
liberty carried out a hunger strike because
they had been transferred to a different floor
of the prison. They alleged that the move had
worsened their conditions in detention.

Uruguay continued to drop down Reporters
Without Borders’ ranking of countries based
on freedom of expression, from 44th in 2022
to 52nd in 2023. A report issued in 2023 by
the local organization Centre for Archives and
Access to Public Information (CAINFO)
stated that 69 cases of threats to journalists
were reported in 2022 and early 2023. In
July, according to the media, journalists from
the public television channel of the
subnational government of Montevideo
denounced undue pressure to cover stories
benefiting the local government.

IMPUNITY

RIGHT TO INFORMATION

In 2023, 21 women and girls were killed for
gender-related reasons. Among them,
according to media outlets, was a 17-year-old
girl murdered by her 17-year-old former
partner. The government failed to fully
implement Law 19.580 on gender-based
violence against women or to allocate funds
to create courts to adjudicate such cases.
Despite advances in the enjoyment of
sexual and reproductive rights, obstacles to
implementing public policies for preventing,
addressing and redressing the consequences
of pregnancies in girls and adolescents under
15 years remained. According to the State
Health Services Administration, between May
2021 and April 2023, 119 girls and other
adolescents aged under 15 were pregnant.
Authorities also indicated that of these 119
cases, 50% of the pregnancies were the
result of sexual abuse and 34% occurred in a
non-abusive relationship between peers. In
the remaining 16% an abusive relationship
could not be ruled out.
The National Integrated Care System,
created in 2015, failed to provide adequate
services to its target population (children

Public institutions failed to implement
policies of transparency and access to public
information, as mandated in the 2008 Law
18.381 on access to public information.
According to CAINFO, there were 24
episodes that demonstrated a deterioration in
the application of passive transparency
standards in the country. This was
particularly evident during the water
emergency in the Montevideo Metropolitan
Area in the first half of the year, during which
authorities hindered access to information on
the management and quality of drinking
water and how it was affecting human health.

INHUMANE DETENTION CONDITIONS
The penitentiary system continued to be
overcrowded. According to the Parliamentary
Commissioner for the Penitentiary System,
the prison population increased steadily,
reaching about 15,400 inmates. Of these,
1,167 were women, an increase of 6.9% in
the number of women in detention since
2022.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Impunity for crimes against humanity and
human rights violations committed during the
civil-military regime (1973-1985) still
prevailed, but 18 convictions of current or
retired members of the military and police
were established in 2023 on charges of
torture, kidnapping and murder during the
civil-military regime.
In June, human remains dating from the
civil-military regime were found at the military
facility but had not yet been identified.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS

399

under three years old, people with disabilities
and older adults in a dependent situation).
This failure had a direct impact on the lives of
women, who do the majority of unpaid care
work. According to the most up-to-date
official statistics from the Ministry of Social
Development, 61.4% of women’s weekly
workload in Uruguay was unpaid, compared
with 35.9% for men.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Obstacles to accessing public mental health
services persisted because of insufficient
availability of appointments in the face of
increased demand at a national level.
According to the Ministry of Health, in
2022, 823 people died by suicide, a rate
of 23.2 per 100,000 inhabitants and more
than twice as high as the rest of Latin
America.

RIGHT TO WATER
For the first half of 2023, a water emergency
affected part of the Metropolitan Region
(departments of Montevideo and Canelones),
causing drinking water shortages.1 Difficulties
accessing clear and accurate information
about the management of the water crisis
and the quality of drinking water were
reported.
In July, the UN Special Rapporteur on the
human rights to safe drinking water and
sanitation and the UN Working Group on
Business and Human Rights urged the
government to prioritize water for human
consumption. According to the State Sanitary
Works (OSE) and information provided by the
Faculty of Chemistry of the University of the
Republic, a considerable increase in salinity
levels had been affecting the quality of
drinking water, impacting more than 60% of
the population, particularly the most
vulnerable groups.
1. “Uruguay: Access to drinking water is a human right”, 29 May
(Spanish only)

400

UZBEKISTAN
Republic of Uzbekistan
The alleged organizers of mass protests in
2022 were sentenced in unfair trials on
politically motivated charges. Authorities
tightened their grip on critical voices,
especially on social media. Torture and illtreatment remained widespread in places of
detention, and impunity was commonplace
for those suspected of criminal
responsibility. Amendments to the criminal
and administrative codes criminalized
domestic violence. The exercise of the right
to freedom of religion remained tightly
controlled.

BACKGROUND
Controversial changes to the constitution,
which had led to mass protests in
Karakalpakstan in 2022, were adopted
following a referendum in April.
President Shavkat Mirziyoyev was elected
uncontested to a new seven-year term in
June.

UNFAIR TRIALS
Dozens of people connected with the violently
suppressed mass protests in Karakalpakstan
were convicted in unfair trials on politically
motivated charges throughout the year.
On 31 January, a court in the city of
Bukhara, eastern Uzbekistan, sentenced
lawyer and editor Dauletmurat Tazhimuratov
to 16 years’ imprisonment over alleged
violent crimes in relation to the protests. The
judges dismissed his allegations of torture
and video footage from the protests that
showed him urging the crowd not to resort to
violence. Human rights defenders monitoring
the trial expressed concern that the 21 codefendants of Dauletmurat Tazhimuratov
were coerced into incriminating him in
exchange for lighter sentences. On 6 June,
the Supreme Court of Uzbekistan upheld his
verdict on appeal. He maintained his
innocence.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Despite widespread allegations of unlawful
use of force against peaceful protesters in
Karakalpakstan, only three members of the
security forces were held accountable.
According to a statement issued by the
Supreme Court in August, two unnamed
police officers were convicted of torturing
detainees and sentenced to seven years in
prison, and a third was sentenced to three
years’ imprisonment for failing to assist a
dying person.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Defamation and insult, including insulting the
president, remained criminal offences.
Authorities tightened their grip on critical
voices, especially those on social media.
At least 10 bloggers were convicted on
allegedly fabricated and politically motivated
charges for critical online publications.
In February, the UN Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention concluded that the
detention of Otabek Sattoriy was arbitrary and
called for his release. He was serving a sixand-a-half-year prison sentence on
defamation and extortion charges for his
criticism of corruption among local officials.
In April, he was denied a transfer to less
harsh prison conditions because of alleged
violations of prison rules, but was eventually
transferred to an open-type prison in
December.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment remained
widespread in places of detention and
impunity remained commonplace for those
suspected of criminal responsibility.
There was no progress in the
implementation of proposals made by the
Prosecutor General’s Office in 2021 to
address torture by reforming the criminal
code, establishing independent mechanisms
to monitor torture complaints, improving
prison conditions and addressing reparations
for torture.
The parliamentary commission set up in
July 2022 to investigate the violence in
Karakalpakstan, including the torture

The State of the World’s Human Rights

allegations, had still failed to publish a report
on its findings by the end of the year.
In November, two UN Special Rapporteurs
expressed concern for the safety and wellbeing of Daulemurat Tazhimuratov (see
above, Unfair trials) after his lawyer reported
that his mental and physical health had
significantly deteriorated in September. He
had been kept in solitary confinement with no
access to information and denied adequate
healthcare and food.
During his appeal hearing in October,
imprisoned blogger Abdukodir Muminov told
the court that police had “electrocuted my
body, kicked and crushed my genitals,
repeatedly hit my leg with a special baton …
[and] broke my rib” to force a confession.
The court failed to order an investigation into
his claims of torture.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
In April, legislative amendments criminalized
domestic violence as a separate offence for
the first time and provided women and
children who are victims of violence with
additional protection mechanisms.1 These
new legal protections were, however, officially
described as “strengthening the institution of
the family” and were undermined by officials
prioritizing reconciliation and reunification of
families over the protection of women’s and
children’s rights.
In September, the Committee on Family and
Women’s Affairs reported that the Ministry of
Internal Affairs had issued 21,871 protection
orders to women who had experienced
violence or abuse between January and
August. Most cases, and 84.7% of the orders
related to domestic violence, ended in
reconciliation.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The draft criminal code retained an article
criminalizing consensual sexual relations
between adult men. During his visit in March,
the UN High Commissioner for Human
Rights urged authorities to exclude this
article.
Uzbekistan accepted all the
recommendations made by states at the UPR

401

of its human rights record in November,
except for those on LGBTI people’s rights.
The government cited “generally accepted
norms” as the reason for declining to
implement these recommendations.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Authorities continued to restrict the exercise
of religious freedom despite repeated
promises to eliminate restrictions and amend
the 2021 Law on Religion.
Authorities persisted in prosecuting devout
Muslims on overly broad and vaguely worded
“extremism-related” charges and failed to
investigate their allegations of torture and illtreatment. Student Sardor Rakhmankulov,
sentenced to five years’ imprisonment in
January for sharing an Islamic religious song
via social media, alleged in court that police
had suffocated him with a plastic bag and
taken turns kicking him. An appeal court
failed to consider his allegations of torture.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
In August, CEE Bankwatch Network and the
Uzbek Forum for Human Rights lodged a
complaint against the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development. The
complaint, filed with the bank’s Independent
Project Accountability Mechanism, related to
its failure to address concerns about illegal
land confiscations, exploitative contracts, and
mass redundancies at Indorama Agro, one of
Uzbekistan’s largest private cotton producers,
before releasing funds. Managers had been
actively trying to dismantle Indorama’s
workers’ union, the only independent trade
union in the country.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Uzbekistan’s energy sector remained heavily
dependent on fossil fuels and continued to
heavily subsidize the use of fossil fuels. In
October, the government signed an
agreement with the World Bank to fund
national policies to reduce emissions,
including through subsidy reform and carbon
market transactions.
Air pollution in major population centres,
mainly from the burning of fossil fuels for

402

energy and transport, regularly reached levels
classified as dangerous. Research by the
World Bank and the Ministry of Economic
Development and Poverty Reduction found
that mortality attributable to particulate air
pollution aggravated by dust from
encroaching desertification had resulted in
an economic loss equivalent to 6% of GDP.
1. “Uzbekistan: Parliament passes long-overdue legislation
criminalizing domestic violence”, 6 April

VENEZUELA
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Lack of access to economic and social
rights remained a serious concern, with the
majority of the population experiencing
severe food insecurity. The public health
system was in a state of collapse. The
government failed to implement
humanitarian measures agreed in 2022 to
address these issues. Protests demanding
economic and social rights were met with
unlawful force and other repressive
measures by security forces. Critics of
President Maduro’s government were
arbitrarily detained, forcibly disappeared
and tortured with the acquiescence of the
judicial system. The government
acknowledged 455 cases of enforced
disappearance reported since 2015, the
majority of which had not been resolved.
Impunity for ongoing extrajudicial
executions by the security forces persisted.
Despite some releases at the end of the
year, politically motivated arbitrary
detentions remained systematic. The UN
Fact-Finding Mission on Venezuela exposed
crimes against humanity, called for
investigations into the state’s repressive
policies, and noted a lack of compliance
with previous recommendations. The ICC
continued its investigation into crimes
against humanity in Venezuela despite the
government’s attempts to suspend the
process. Prison conditions, including a lack
of access to water and food, deteriorated

The State of the World’s Human Rights

further. Illegal mining and violence
threatened Indigenous Peoples’ rights in the
Orinoco Mining Arc area. Huge numbers of
Venezuelans continued to flee the country
and those deported back to the country
faced arbitrary arrest. Access to sexual and
reproductive health services was severely
compromised and abortion remained
criminalized. Violence against women and
girls persisted and LGBTI people continued
to face discrimination.

BACKGROUND
Inflation and an alarming lack of purchasing
power to buy essential goods and services
continued to result in most of the population
experiencing a profound humanitarian crisis,
particularly people living outside the capital,
Caracas.
The government and a part of the
opposition engaged in political negotiations;
by October they had agreed certain
conditions regarding the 2024 elections.
The UN Fact-Finding Mission (FFM)
presented reports about the selective
repression of political opponents and the
structure of police agencies responsible for
extrajudicial executions.
The government’s challenge to territorial
boundaries with Guyana led to an increase in
military presence along the border,
heightening the risk of human rights
violations. Critics of this policy faced an
elevated threat of criminalization.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Lack of access to adequate food, water and
healthcare remained a serious concern. By
the end of the year, the “Mesa Social”
humanitarian agreement between the
government and the opposition in 2022 had
still not been implemented. The agreement
established a humanitarian fund drawn from
Venezuelan assets seized abroad and
managed by the UN to attend to urgent
issues related to health, education and
electricity services.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

RIGHT TO WORK
Allegations of persecution, intimidation,
harassment and other acts of violence
against unionists and workers persisted. The
OHCHR reported 12 cases of criminalization
of union leaders in 2023, up to September.
RIGHT TO EDUCATION
Civil society organization HumVenezuela
reported that 18% of children did not attend
school in 2023 and at least 44.8% did not
attend regularly due to underfunding and
understaffing of public schools and teachers’
low wages. Teachers continued to demand
better working conditions in public schools.
RIGHT TO HEALTH
Almost three-quarters (72.4%) of public
health centres experienced shortages of
medicines, appliances and staff, and 88.9%
of public health services were inoperative.
In October, the half-yearly report from the
National Hospitals Survey found that around
55% of public health facilities did not have
regular access to water and in 90% of cases
patients had to bring their own surgical
supplies. The same survey concluded that
127 people had died because of power cuts
in hospitals between January and September
2023.
The OHCHR reported on the deterioration of
the healthcare system caused by
underfunding and understaffing. It estimated
that 560,660 children aged between 12 and
23 months had not yet received the measles,
mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine.
According to civil society organizations,
health workers who denounced deficiencies
and low salaries faced intimidation by
authorities. In August, 10 children developed
meningeal infection after medical treatment
for leukaemia. The medication associated
with the infection was imported and
distributed by the Venezuelan Social Security
Institute at the J.M. de los Ríos Children’s
Hospital in Caracas. In September, the health
authorities refused to conduct an analysis of
the medication. By November, one of the
children had died and there was no official
information regarding investigations to
determine responsibility for her death. Media

403

reported that medical associations had asked
for an official investigation into this case.
RIGHTS TO FOOD AND WATER
According to the Centre for Documentation
and Social Analysis, by October, the cost of a
monthly basic basket of food for a household
of five in Venezuela was equivalent to about
USD 494, while the monthly minimum wage
was USD 3.67, leaving the majority of the
population facing severe food insecurity. The
minimum wage had not been adjusted since
March 2022. By the end of 2023, the
situation had deteriorated further due to a
peak in inflation and currency devaluation.
According to the World Bank, by August,
Venezuela had the third highest inflation rate
for food prices in the world.
According to HumVenezuela, 25.7% of
households ate fewer than three meals a day
and 22.8% went entire days without eating.
Furthermore, 74.5% of households did not
have regular access to safe drinking water.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
The policy of repression implemented by the
government continued. Political opponents,
real and perceived, were constantly under
attack and at risk of arbitrary detention,
torture and other human rights violations.
According to the human rights organization
Foro Penal, around 9,000 people continued
to be subject to restrictions on their freedom
because of current or past politically
motivated judicial procedures.
Authorities continued to restrict political
participation. The opposition leader María
Corina Machado, who won the primary
election in October, was allegedly disqualified
to run for president in the upcoming election.
Civic space was constantly under attack. In
January, parliament started discussions
around a bill to audit and regulate the
operations of NGOs and oversee their actions
and funding. The proposed bill would further
restrict their activities and would enable the
government to unilaterally dissolve
associations. The bill was still pending by the
end of the year.
In August, a Supreme Court ruling
dismissed the entire board of directors of the

404

Venezuelan Red Cross Society and appointed
a new director with the instruction to
restructure the organization.
In October, the Prosecutor’s Office
announced a criminal investigation into
members of the National Primaries
Commission (a non-governmental initiative to
elect an opposition candidate) as an attempt
to halt political participation. In December,
Roberto Adbul, commission member and
president of the NGO Súmate, was arbitrarily
detained and released after two weeks. At the
end of 2023, the legal situation of the
commission members remained unclear.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Authorities’ repressive tactics persisted,
including using the judicial system to silence
dissent and criminalize human rights
defenders.
According to the Venezuelan Observatory on
Social Conflict, there were 6,956 protests in
2023, equivalent to 19 protests per day, of
which 80% were demanding economic and
social rights. Many were led by unionist
collectives demanding their workers’ rights.
Authorities often responded with unnecessary
and excessive force and arbitrary detentions.
In July, the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights reported prolonged delays and
impunity in the investigation into deaths
during protests in 2014, 2017 and 2019.
Local organization Public Space registered
349 attacks on freedom of expression in the
form of censorship, verbal attacks and
intimidation targeting journalists and other
media workers from January to November. In
September, journalist Luis Alejandro Acosta
was arbitrarily detained and prosecuted for
allegedly promoting and inciting illegal
mining, being in a protected area, and
abetting criminal acts, while he was reporting
on illegal gold mining in the southern state of
Amazonas. He was released after 14 days.

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND UNFAIR
TRIALS
The government’s use of arbitrary detention
against civilians could constitute crimes

The State of the World’s Human Rights

against humanity. According to civil society
organizations, between 2014 and 2023 there
were around 15,700 arbitrary arrests.
A negotiated agreement was reached in
October between the Unitary Platform and
President Maduro’s representatives,
supported by the USA and other countries,
which led to the release of 26 detainees by
the end of the year. The conditions for their
release remained unclear. Around 280
people remained under politically motivated
arbitrary detention, according to local
organizations.
Other human rights violations such as
enforced disappearances and torture
continued to be part of the policy of
repression implemented by the government.
Amnesty International reported that following
arrest victims were routinely presented before
the court – often with special jurisdiction on
terrorism – and charged with criminal
association and other terrorism-related
charges, before being transferred to a police
or military facility to await trial for months or
even years. Many victims reported being
subjected to torture and other ill-treatment.
These procedures breached fair trial
guarantees and other human rights.1
During the UN Human Rights Committee
review, Venezuelan authorities claimed that it
did not constitute enforced disappearance if
someone was arrested and their family was
not informed of their whereabouts until hours
or days later. In the context of the review,
authorities acknowledged that between 2015
and 2022, of 455 alleged enforced
disappearances, only 10 had gone to trial
with no information on the whereabouts of
the victims and nobody having been
sanctioned.
In July, activists and union leaders Alcides
Bracho, Gabriel Blanco, Emilio Negrín,
Alonso Meléndez, Néstor Astudillo and
Reynaldo Cortés were prosecuted and
sentenced to 16 years’ imprisonment by a
court with special jurisdiction on terrorism.
They had been arbitrarily accused of
conspiracy and criminal association for their
participation in peaceful demonstrations. In

The State of the World’s Human Rights

December, they were released following
political negotiations.
On 30 August, John Álvarez, a student and
activist, was arbitrarily detained. His family
reported that officers from the Directorate of
Military Counter-Intelligence had tortured and
forced him to incriminate a union leader and
a journalist. He was also among the group of
people released in December. In October,
journalist and political activist Roland
Carreño, detained since 2020, was released
following talks between the government and
opposition. Unionist Guillermo Zárraga was
also released in December.
Several people arbitrarily detained on
political grounds, including Robert Franco
and Darío Estrada, were still waiting for their
trials to resume at the end of the year. In July,
these were postponed and the special
jurisdiction on terrorism was suddenly
relocated from one court to another, meaning
their trials had to start again.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
Despite the OHCHR reporting in 2022 that
authorities had dissolved the Bolivarian
National Police’s Special Actions Forces
(FAES), FAES was implicated in several
hundred alleged extrajudicial executions in
2023. The FFM found that FAES had been
replaced by the Directorate of Strategic and
Tactical Actions and that several FAES
officials remained active within the Bolivarian
police force.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In June, an Argentinian federal prosecutor
opened a criminal investigation against
officers of the Bolivarian National Guard for
the extrajudicial executions of two people as
part of the repression implemented in
Venezuela during 2014.
Human rights violations remained
unpunished. The FFM noted the lack of
compliance with recommendations made by
the mission in its previous reports and how
the judicial system was used to shield
security agencies involved in gross human
rights violations.

405

In June, the Pre-Trial Chamber of the ICC
authorized the prosecutor to resume his
investigation into alleged crimes against
humanity in Venezuela. Following
Venezuela’s appeal, the decision of the
Appeals Chamber was still pending at the
end of the year.
At the end of 2023, the UN Special
Rapporteur on the right to food announced a
visit to the country. Other UN Rapporteurs
and treaty bodies were still waiting for official
invitations, despite the government’s
commitment in 2019 to extend such
invitations. The FFM had still not been
granted access to the country by the end of
the year.

INHUMANE DETENTION CONDITIONS
Conditions in prisons and detention centres
deteriorated further, including overcrowding
and insufficient provision of food and water.
Prisoners and Detainees were dependent on
relatives to provide essential resources for
their survival. Prolonged detention in police
stations and other illegal detention centres
continued.
The reported lack of health services and
medical treatment in detention facilities put
detainees’ lives at risk. Emirlendris Benítez,
who was still arbitrarily detained for political
reasons, faced severe health conditions
without access to medical care.2
Women deprived of their liberty experienced
inhumane conditions and gender-specific
facilities were lacking.
During the UN Human Rights Committee
review, the state acknowledged that it had no
control over six prisons because inmates
ruled those facilities. Following a security
operation in September, the government
started to regain control over the facilities in
Tocorón, Tocuyito Puente Ayala, Trujillo, La
Pica, Vista Hermosa and San Felipe.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Illegal mining in the Orinoco Mining Arc area
continued to have serious impacts on human
rights in Bolívar state, southern Venezuela,
disproportionately affecting Indigenous
Peoples’ rights to self-determination, free,

406

prior and informed consent and a healthy
environment.
More than a year after the murder of Virgilio
Trujillo Arana, land and Indigenous human
rights defender, impunity for the crime
persisted. His relatives reported experiencing
threats by unidentified people.
In September, human rights defenders
reported military forces seizing control of the
Yapacana National Park in the south of the
country, expelling illegal miners and peasants
with allegedly excessive force. The Ministry of
Defence acknowledged the deaths of two
people, three people wounded, and the
eviction of 12,000 people from the area,
many of whom were Indigenous Peoples.
Civil society organizations reported that at
least 10 people had died during the
operation.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defender and prisoner of
conscience Javier Tarazona, director of the
NGO FUNDAREDES, remained in arbitrary
detention following his arrest in 2021 on
terrorism-related charges.
The Centre for Defenders and Justice
reported 524 threats against human rights
defenders between January and November,
including smear campaigns and
stigmatization by pro-government media
outlets and on social media.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
By the end of the year, more than 7.72
million Venezuelans had left the country. In
October, deportation flights from the USA to
Venezuela resumed and 928 people had
been deported by the end of the year. In
November, at least 155 people were deported
from Iceland, apparently after their asylum
applications had been denied. These
individuals were reportedly arrested upon
arrival in Venezuela.
In November, the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights
recommended that countries in the region
provide protection and grant refugee status to
people fleeing from Venezuela.

The State of the World’s Human Rights

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS

Women and girls in Venezuela continued to
face challenges in ensuring access to
adequate food, water and sanitation. The
CEDAW Committee stated that the complex
humanitarian situation since 2015 had had a
differentiated impact on women and girls,
driving women into economic dependence in
abusive relationships and increasing their risk
of becoming victims of gender-based
violence.
SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
The CEDAW Committee noted with concern
the criminalization of abortion; reports of
forced sterilization; limited access to modern
contraceptives and sexual and reproductive
health services; and the high rates of
maternal mortality owing to limited access to
sexual and reproductive health services.
The impact of the ongoing humanitarian
emergency on sexual and reproductive health
services continued to obstruct women’s and
girls’ access to sexual and reproductive
rights.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
The CEDAW Committee expressed concern
about the high incidence of gender-based
violence against women and girls, including
the persistence of femicides,
disappearances, and psychological and
sexual violence against women and girls. The
CEDAW Committee also highlighted the lack
of a gender-sensitive protocol for the
investigation of femicides, the fact that there
were only five shelters for victims of genderbased violence, and the lack of statistical
data on cases of gender-based violence
against women and girls.
In October, during the Human Rights
Committee review, Venezuela’s representative
reported that 95% of investigations into
femicide had resulted in conviction and
nearly 1,700 charges of femicide had been
prosecuted between 2016 and 2023.
The local civil society organization Centre for
Justice and Peace reported 201 alleged
femicides between January and September.

LGBTI people continued to face
discrimination. In July, 33 men were
arbitrarily arrested and faced abuses by
police agents based on their sexual
orientation. Their identities were published in
the media. Thirty of the victims were released
after three days; the others were deprived of
their liberty for 10 days, after which they were
released under court supervision, facing
charges for “indecency” and “noise
pollution”.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
By the end of the year, Venezuela had not
signed or ratified the Escazú Agreement and
the government’s aspiration to increase oil
production contradicted its international
commitments to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions.
1. Venezuela: Life Detained: Politically Motivated Arbitrary Detentions
Continue in Venezuela, 29 August
2. “Venezuela: Venezuelan detainees’ life at risk”, 9 October

VIET NAM
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
The crackdown on dissent continued and
journalists and human rights defenders
were among those imprisoned in violation of
their right to freedom of expression. Viet
Nam authorities were implicated in the
abduction of a Vietnamese refugee living in
Thailand. Executions were reported but the
use of the death penalty was shrouded in
secrecy. Government surveillance was
widespread and new research pointed to the
use of spyware technology to target critics
or others working on issues considered
sensitive to Vietnamese government
interests.

BACKGROUND
Viet Nam took its seat on the UN Human
Rights Council in January. Since announcing
its candidacy in February 2021, dozens of

The State of the World’s Human Rights

407

journalists, NGO leaders, human rights
defenders and others had been subjected to
arbitrary arrest and detention. Võ Văn
Thưởng replaced Nguyễn Xuân Phúc as
President in March, but the transition
brought no improvement in the human rights
situation.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Arrests and prosecutions of journalists and
political, environmental and other activists for
expressing their opinions continued. On 12
April, the People’s Court in the capital, Hanoi,
sentenced prominent activist and
independent journalist Nguyễn Lân Thắng to
six years in prison in a closed hearing. He
was arrested on 5 July 2022 on charges of
“making, storing, distributing, or
disseminating information, documents, and
items against the state” under Article 117 of
the 2015 Criminal Code. Nguyễn Lân Thắng
was held in Hanoi's Detention Centre No. 1
for more than seven months following his
arrest, and was only permitted to meet his
lawyer for the first time on 16 February.1
In March, human rights defender Trương
Văn Dũng was found guilty of disseminating
“propaganda against the government” and
sentenced to six years’ imprisonment under
Article 88 of the earlier 1999 version of the
Criminal Code, which still applied when he
was initially charged. He was arrested on 21
May 2022 after being accused of giving
interviews to foreign media and possessing
copies of two “illegally printed books”. During
his trial, Trương Văn Dũng accused the
police of beating him but no investigations
into the allegations were known to have taken
place.2
On 6 April, the wife of activist Bùi Tuấn Lâm
received a notification from the authorities
that investigations against him had been
completed and that he would be tried under
Article 117 of the 2015 Criminal Code for
“disseminating propaganda against the
state”. The charges related to dozens of
videos that he had posted on Facebook and
YouTube. Bùi Tuấn Lâm, who is well-known
for his satirical videos on human rights and
social issues, was first questioned by the Da

408

Nang city police in November 2021 after a
video making fun of the Minister of Public
Security eating in an expensive London
restaurant went viral on Facebook. On 25
May, he was sentenced to five-and-a-half
years in prison.3
On 5 July, the Vietnamese police
announced that Youtuber Đường Văn Thái
was in pretrial detention having been charged
under Article 117 of the 2015 Criminal Code.
Đường Văn Thái had been granted refugee
status in Thailand in 2020 but went missing
in the Thai capital, Bangkok, on 13 April
2023. Witness testimony and circumstantial
evidence suggested he was abducted from
Thailand by Viet Nam state agents.
The Ho Chi Minh City Court sentenced
environmental activist Hoàng Thị Minh Hồng
to three years’ imprisonment on 28
September on trumped-up charges of tax
evasion. She was the fifth prominent
environmental campaigner to be accused of
tax evasion since 2021.
During a visit by family members in
December, imprisoned journalist Lê Hữu
Minh Tuấn said that his health had
deteriorated significantly and that he feared
he may die if he did not receive appropriate
medical care. Lê Hữu Minh Tuấn, who is
serving an 11-year sentence for “opposing
the state”, was reported to be suffering from
colitis, hepatitis and other possible ailments.

DEATH PENALTY
Figures on executions and death sentences
remained classified as a state secret
preventing independent scrutiny. However,
on at least two occasions families received
notification of the execution or imminent
execution of relatives. The family of Nguyễn
Văn Chưởng, who was sentenced to death in
July 2007, received a notification from the
People’s Court of Hải Phòng on 4 August
2023, instructing them to make
arrangements to receive Nguyen’s remains.4
On 18 September, the family of Lê Văn
Mạnh were informed that the decision to
execute him was confirmed. They were
subsequently told that he had been executed

The State of the World’s Human Rights

on 22 September without having been
allowed to visit him first.
Both men had alleged that they had
“confessed” to the crimes of which they were
convicted under torture by police.5

UNLAWFUL SURVEILLANCE
Research by Amnesty International revealed
that between February and June, a campaign
connected to Intellexa’s Predator spyware
attack infrastructure targeted at least 50
social media accounts belonging to 27
individuals and 23 institutions, some of
whom were Vietnamese. Amnesty
International found that Intellexa tools were
sold to Vietnamese companies which had
business links to the Vietnamese Ministry of
Public Security. The research suggested that
Vietnamese government agents may have
been behind the spyware campaign.6
1. “Viet Nam: 10 organisations demand the dropping of charges
against journalist Nguyen Lan Thang and the guarantee of the right
to a fair trial by admitting the press and public to observe the trial”,
11 April
2. “Viet Nam: Drop charges and immediately release activist sentenced
to six years in prison”, 12 July
3. “Viet Nam: Drop trumped-up charges against activist behind ‘Salt
Bae’ satire video”, 23 May
4. “Viet Nam: Open Letter: Halt the arbitrary execution of death row
prisoner Nguyen Van Chuong”, 9 August
5. Viet Nam: Pursuit of Civil Space, Amnesty International: Submission
to the 46th Session of the UPR Working Group, 29 April – 10 May
2024, 20 October
6. “Global: ‘Predator Files’ spyware scandal reveals brazen targeting of
civil society, politicians and officials”, 9 October

YEMEN
Republic of Yemen
Despite a decline in armed conflict and
cross-border attacks compared to previous
years, all parties to the long-standing
conflict in Yemen continued to commit
unlawful attacks and killings with impunity.
The internationally recognized government
of Yemen and the Huthi de facto
authorities, which control different parts of
the country, continued to harass, threaten,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

arbitrarily detain, forcibly disappear and
prosecute journalists and activists for
peacefully exercising their right to freedom
of expression. The Huthi de facto
authorities forcibly disappeared members of
the Baha’i religious minority for exercising
their right to freedom of religion and belief.
All parties to the conflict restricted delivery
of humanitarian aid. The Huthi de facto
authorities continued to ban women from
travelling without a male guardian,
restricting their ability to work or receive
humanitarian aid. All parties failed to
provide justice for victims of crimes under
international law and human rights
violations.

BACKGROUND
While 2023 saw a decline in fighting and
cross-border attacks, all parties to the conflict
sporadically attacked civilian areas and
frontlines in Ma’rib, Hodeidah, Ta’iz, Sa’adah,
Al Jawf, Shabwa and Dhale’ governorates.
In March, under the auspices of the UN,
parties to the conflict agreed to release
almost 900 conflict-related detainees.
Between 14 and 16 April, the Saudi
government and the internationally
recognized government of Yemen, which is
supported by the Saudi Arabia-led coalition,
released 706 detainees, while the Huthi de
facto authorities released 181, including four
journalists on death row – Akram Al-Walidi,
Abdelkhaleq Amran, Hareth Hamid and
Tawfiq Al-Mansouri.1 However, hundreds of
other individuals remained unlawfully
detained.2
Yemenis’ access to food, safe drinking
water, a healthy environment and adequate
health services remained highly restricted.
According to OCHA, the 2023 funding gap in
the Yemen Humanitarian Response Plan
exacerbated food insecurity and jeopardized
the humanitarian response, compelling aid
organizations to scale back or close crucial
humanitarian programmes.
On 31 October, the Huthi military
spokesperson announced they had carried
out four drone and missile attacks targeting
Israel since 7 October, although none

409

reached Israeli territory. On 27 October, one
of the drones crashed near a hospital in
Taba, Egypt, injuring six people.
Between November and December, the
Huthi armed forces carried out around 24
attacks on commercial and military ships in
the Red Sea. On 19 November, the Huthis
seized the Galaxy Leader, a British owned
and Japanese operated vehicles carrier and
arbitrarily detained 25 of its crew members.
Huthi officials vowed to continue the Red Sea
maritime attacks until the Israeli military
campaign in Gaza ends.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
On 13 March, a drone strike allegedly
launched by Huthi forces hit a field hospital
in Hajar area, western Qa’atabah district in
Dhale’ governorate, reportedly injuring three
civilians, including two health workers.
On 22 April, three civilians were killed,
including a woman and a 12-year-old child,
and a further nine were injured, all from the
same family, when shells fired from a Huthicontrolled area hit houses in Al-Majash al-Ala
area in Mawza district, Ta’iz governorate.
On 4 July, mortar fire injured five children
aged between 8 and 12 while they were
herding their goats on al-Jibalayn hill in alMuharith village, Hodeidah governorate.
On 15 July, mortar fire killed two civilians
and damaged their home in al-Aboos village,
Ta’iz governorate, in an exchange of fire
between government and Huthi forces.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION, RELIGION
AND BELIEF
Parties to the conflict continued to harass,
threaten, arbitrarily detain, forcibly disappear
and prosecute individuals for peacefully
exercising their right to freedom of
expression, religion and belief.
HUTHI DE FACTO AUTHORITIES
On 25 May, Huthi security forces stormed a
peaceful gathering of Baha’is, a religious
minority, in the capital, Sana’a. They detained
and forcibly disappeared 17 individuals,
among them five women. Following
international pressure, 11 were released.3
However, five men and one woman remained

410

held at the Huthi-run security and
intelligence detention centre in Hadda and
Sana’a.
On 24 August, five armed men in civilian
clothes physically assaulted journalist Mujalli
al-Samadi in al-Safiyah neighbourhood of
Sana’a and issued threats to stop him
criticizing the Huthis. He reported the
incident at the police station in al-Sab’ein
district in Sana’a but the authorities failed to
hold anyone to account. Mujalli al-Samadi’s
radio station, Sawt al Yemen, which the
Huthis had shut down in January 2022,
remained closed despite the Journalism and
Publications Court in Sana’a ruling in July
2022 that the station was allowed to resume
broadcasting.
The Huthi de facto authorities arbitrarily
detained journalist Nabil al-Sidawi after 21
September, when he was due to be released
after serving a prison sentence. Huthi
security and intelligence services had
detained him on 21 September 2015.
Following a grossly unfair trial in 2022 by the
Sana’a-based Specialized Criminal Court
(SCC) – a court traditionally reserved for
security-related crimes – he was sentenced
to eight years in prison.
On 26 September, Huthi de facto authorities
carried out a wave of arrests rounding up
scores of largely peaceful demonstrators who
had gathered to commemorate the
anniversary of Yemen’s September
Revolution.4
GOVERNMENT OF YEMEN
On 11 July, the criminal investigation
directorate in Ta’iz governorate summoned
for investigation journalist Jamil al-Samit
based on a complaint filed by Ta’iz military
axis leadership after he published articles
calling for the leadership to be replaced. He
was arbitrarily detained for a day and then
released. On 1 August, he was again
summoned and interrogated by Ta’iz police,
who accused him of jeopardizing the police’s
image in his articles. He was arbitrarily
detained for five days and then released.
In August, security forces in Ma’rib city
followed a media worker after he finished
filming a news report in al-Hay’a street, then

The State of the World’s Human Rights

seized his camera and deleted the footage.
They took him to a police station and only
released him after he signed a pledge that he
would not film in the city without prior
approval from the security administration.
SOUTHERN TRANSITIONAL COUNCIL
On 1 March, Security Belt forces, a
paramilitary wing of the Southern Transitional
Council (STC) that controls parts of south
Yemen, stormed the Yemeni Journalists’
Syndicate headquarters in Al Tawahi district,
Aden governorate, confiscating property,
expelling the journalists present and
prohibiting them from accessing the building.
The Security Belt forces then replaced the
syndicates’ sign with that of the STCsupported Southern Journalists and Media
Workers Syndicate. On 28 March, the Yemeni
Journalists’ Syndicate filed a complaint
before the public prosecutor in Aden to
investigate the incident but no action was
taken.
The STC de facto authorities continued to
detain journalist Ahmad Maher who was
arbitrarily arrested by Security Belt forces on
6 August 2022 in Dar Sa’ad district, Aden
governorate. In September 2022, the criminal
prosecution charged him with publishing fake
and misleading news. From March 2023, the
Specialized Criminal Court in Aden
repeatedly adjourned his hearing.

DENIAL OF HUMANITARIAN ACCESS
Parties to the conflict continued to restrict
movement and the delivery of aid, including
by imposing bureaucratic constraints such as
delayed approvals, travel permit denials or
delays, cancellation of humanitarian
initiatives, and interference in the project
design, implementation and assessment of
humanitarian activities.
In May, Huthi de facto authorities issued a
circular requiring humanitarian organizations
to inform them every month about their
media, advocacy and awareness-raising
projects and activities and to apply for
permits to implement them. The circular also
required humanitarian organizations to
provide their monthly media reports for
review and sign-off by the Supreme Council,

The State of the World’s Human Rights

and to be accompanied by a media
representative appointed by the Huthis
during field operations.
Yemeni female humanitarian workers
continued to struggle to conduct fieldwork in
Huthi-controlled areas because of the
mahram (male guardianship) requirement
which restricted field visits and aid deliveries.
On 21 July, unknown gunmen shot dead
World Food Programme staff member
Muayad Hameidi in Al Turbah city, Ta’iz
governorate.
On 11 August, five UN staff who had been
abducted in February 2022 in Abyan
governorate were released.
On 25 October, the Safety and Security
Director at Save the Children, Hisham AlHakimi, died while being arbitrarily detained
by the Huthis in Sana’a. He was detained on
9 September while off duty and was held
incommunicado. Following his death, Save
the Children suspended operations in
northern Yemen for 10 days.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
The Huthi de facto authorities continued to
impose their mahram requirement restricting
women’s movement and banning them from
travelling without a male guardian or
evidence of their written approval within
governorates under Huthi control or to other
areas of Yemen. The restrictions made it
difficult for women to work and impacted
access to humanitarian aid for Yemeni
women and girls.
Huthi de facto authorities continued to
detain woman human rights defender Fatma
al-Arwali and deny her a fair trial. On 31 July,
she was charged with espionage, a capital
offence, and her case was transferred to the
Specialized Criminal Court (SCC).5 On 5
December, the SCC sentenced Fatma alArwali to death.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Parties to the conflict failed to provide any
justice for victims of crimes under
international law and human rights violations

411

during the long-standing conflict or to remedy
the harm they inflicted on civilians.
On 26 July, over 40 Yemeni civil society
organizations and victims’ and survivor
associations launched the Yemen Declaration
for Justice and Reconciliation. The
Declaration emphasized the need for a postconflict justice process to actively and
adequately address the grievances of the
Yemeni people. It also laid out principles to
guide the post-conflict justice process, which
included a victim-centred approach,
inclusivity, gender equality, truth and
memorialization, redress and reparations,
accountability, reconciliation, and the
centring of human rights.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
Extreme weather conditions across Yemen,
including heavy rains and flooding,
exacerbated internal displacement in areas
that included Ma’rib, Ta’iz and Ibb
governorates, and increased food and
livelihood insecurity. Following April floods, at
least 31 people died, 37 were injured and
three were reported missing, according to the
UN Food and Agriculture Organization.
According to the United Nations Population
Fund, between January and August, climateinduced displacement affected 109,830
individuals. Yemen was listed as one of the
most vulnerable countries to climate change,
and one of the least prepared for its shocks,
based on its ND-GAIN (the Notre Dame
Global Adaptation Initiative) index score.
The mismanagement of oil infrastructure in
Shabwa governorate continued to pollute alRawda district. In August, further damage to
the oil supply pipeline polluted large areas of
agricultural land and groundwater sources in
the Ghourayr area of the governorate.
On 11 August, the UN completed the
transfer of oil from the FSO Safer, a decaying
oil supertanker moored off Yemen’s port city
of Hodeidah in the Red Sea, into a
replacement vessel. The transfer prevented a
massive oil spill that would have resulted in
an environmental and humanitarian
catastrophe.

412

1. “Yemen: Further information: Four journalists on death row released”,
17 April
2. “Yemen: Parties to the conflict should immediately release all those
arbitrarily detained and reveal the fate of those forcibly disappeared
since the beginning of the armed conflict in Yemen in 2014”, 17 April
3. “Yemen: Further information: 11 Baha’is forcibly disappeared at
great risk”, 8 August
4. “Yemen: Wave of arrests by Huthi de facto authorities following
demonstrations”, 29 September
5. “Yemen: End unfair trial against woman human rights defender
Fatma al-Arwali”, 25 September

ZAMBIA
Republic of Zambia
The government committed to reforming the
Public Order Act. The rights to freedom of
expression, peaceful assembly and
association continued to be violated. The
Access to Information Bill was introduced
to parliament. Rising prices threatened the
right to food. The government made partial
progress in fulfilling its promise to provide
free education for children. High rates of
early and child marriage persisted, despite
legislation outlawing the practice. Extreme
weather events and business activities
undermined the right to a healthy
environment.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
Steps were taken to amend the Public Order
Act (POA), following a review of its provisions
by the Zambia Law Development Commission
(ZLDC), a semi-autonomous statutory body.
The ZLDC presented its review along with the
Public Gathering Bill – which is intended to
repeal and replace the POA – to the minister
of home affairs and internal security for his
consideration. For years, successive
governments have used the POA to restrict
the rights to freedom of expression, peaceful
assembly and association of civil society
organizations and opposition political parties.
Section 5(4) requires that anyone intending
to assemble or convene a public meeting,
procession or demonstration gives the police

The State of the World’s Human Rights

seven days’ notice. While formal approval
from the authorities is unnecessary, the
police have interpreted the provision to mean
that permission is required, and have used it
to target and arrest peaceful protesters or
refuse to grant permission for protests. If
adopted in its current form, the Public
Gathering Bill could go some way to
protecting the rights to freedom of
expression, peaceful assembly and
association.
In March, President Hichilema publicly
reiterated his government’s commitment to
protect human rights, including by reforming
the POA.
On 4 March, the NGO, Sistah Sistah
Foundation, led a march in the capital,
Lusaka to protest against the increase in
sexual and gender-based violence. Between
6 and 7 March, police detained three
foundation members and another protester
on charges under POA provisions of unlawful
assembly and giving the police false
information, although the police had granted
the organization a permit to proceed with the
march. The police claimed that the
demonstration’s purpose was to “promote
LGBTI rights”, which differed from its stated
aim. The members were released on police
bond but their cases were pending further
police investigation.
On 29 September, Elias Gabriel Banda, a
youth activist and former president of the
University of Zambia (UNZA) student union,
was arrested in connection with student riots
at the UNZA on 18 and 19 September. The
accusations against him related to statements
he posted on social media in early
September. Following public demands for his
release, he was freed on bail after seven
days, and charged with criminal trespass and
inciting violence. He was awaiting trial at the
end of the year.
In October, the Independent Broadcasting
Authority, a government body with a mandate
to grant, renew, and suspend or cancel
broadcasters’ licences, made an official
written complaint to the Hot FM radio station.
The complaint concerned an interview in
which historian Sishuwa Sishuwa spoke of a

The State of the World’s Human Rights

“growing public perception” that the
president apparently considered himself
“primarily as the leader of… one half of the
country, mainly [those in ruling United Party
for National Development strongholds]”.

RIGHT TO INFORMATION
The Access to Information Bill was
introduced to parliament in November,
following cabinet approval. If implemented, it
could enhance the public’s access to
information, promote transparency and
accountability, and allow for more active
participation in governance processes.

ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL RIGHTS
The International Monetary Fund agreed in
August 2022 to provide Zambia with a USD
1.3 billion bailout loan, after the country
defaulted on its debt repayments in
November 2020. The loan, to be paid in
instalments, came with stringent conditions,
including that Zambia reach agreement with
all official creditors on debt restructuring. By
the end of 2023, only USD 188 million of the
loan had been received. The shortfall led to
substantial public spending cuts, placing
additional financial burdens on people.
Although the government increased the
healthcare budget, this fell short of what was
needed to ensure adequate access to health
rights. A deal to restructure the debt was
reached in principle in June but in November
creditors rejected the deal, which, along with
the increasing cost of food, electricity and
medicine, further undermined the
government’s ability to fulfil obligations
relating to economic and social rights.
Despite cuts, the increase in the 2023
social protection budget to the equivalent of
USD 347,474 from USD 270,258 in 2022,
was expected to contribute to the effective
implementation of schemes to reduce poverty
and inequality. These included: the social
cash transfer scheme, which entitles
households to monthly payments if they
have, for example, elderly members, people
with severe disabilities or who are chronically
ill, or households headed by a child or a
woman with at least four children; the

413

provision of food aid; and public service
pension funds. These positive measures were
somewhat negated by the adverse economic
impact on the would-be beneficiaries of
monthly increases and fluctuations in fuel
prices, leading to an inflation rate of 9.9% in
July, up from 9.7% in June. This contributed
to increases in the already high cost of living,
undermining residents’ ability to afford
essential goods and services.
RIGHT TO FOOD
While food prices were prohibitive for most
people, the rising costs particularly affected
the 54.7% of the population who were
already living in poverty. According to the
Jesuit Centre for Theological Reflection, the
cost of roller mealie meal – a dietary staple –
had increased by nearly 21% in September
compared to the same month in 2022.
RIGHT TO EDUCATION
The government’s Free Education
Programme, which benefitted children of
primary school age, was rolled out in January.
Education facilities were improved, as were
teacher/pupil ratios when an extra 4,500
teachers were recruited. However, there was
only one teacher per 80 learners, according
to ActionAid Zambia, whereas Ministry of
Education guidelines required a ratio of at
least one teacher per 40 learners. Increased
enrolment in rural schools meant that
teachers were forced to take up roles for
which they were unqualified.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Early and child marriage persisted despite
the enactment of the Children’s Code Act No.
12 in 2022, under which the practice is
prohibited. According to UNICEF, 29% of
women aged between 20 and 24 were
married below the age of 18. Teenage
pregnancy, which affected 29% of all teenage
girls and women, was a main cause. Rates of
early and child marriage were higher in rural
areas, particularly in Katete district, in the
Eastern Province.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
The country experienced extreme weather
events during the 2022/2023 rainy season.

414

Areas affected by flooding included the
Mazabuka, Monze, Choma, Sinazongwe and
Namwala districts in the Southern Province;
Mambwe, Lusangazi and Chama districts in
the Eastern Province; and Mumbwa district in
the Central Province. The Disaster
Management and Mitigation Unit, a statutory
body, reported that over 400,000 people
were affected. Five people died and 10,000
were displaced into temporary camps. There
was widespread damage to homes, farmland
and livestock; many people had no access to
healthcare and education when heavy rain
destroyed key infrastructure.
In August, the government amended the
Environmental Management Act No. 8 of
2023 with the aim of improving
environmental protection and conservation
measures in relation to the use of natural
resources and waste management. It also
provided greater penalties for those not
adhering to its regulations.
In November, the minister of green
economy and environment, accompanied by
Environmental Management Agency officials,
inspected forestry and mining activities in the
Copperbelt in the Central Province. They
found that six gold processing companies
operating plants in Mumbwa district – Asal
Trading Company; Zoncor Mining Company
Limited; Mutumba Women’s Club (Gold
processing plant); Gazi Company Limited;
PuleRay Company Limited; and Orezone
Mining and Exploration Limited – had flouted
Environmental Management Act provisions,
including by releasing untreated wastewater,
thereby polluting the environment. In the
same month, the government ordered them
to cease their operations on grounds that
they lacked written approval from the
Environmental Management Agency.

ZIMBABWE
Republic of Zimbabwe
The rights to freedom of expression,
association and peaceful assembly were
severely restricted, particularly during the

The State of the World’s Human Rights

election period. Opposition members, or
those associated with the opposition, bore
the brunt of the widescale repression of
dissent, including arbitrary detention and
prosecution. New legislation imposed
further restrictions on and harsh penalties
against activists and critics. Plain-clothes
state agents abducted political activists,
tortured them, and killed one man. At least
one activist was reportedly killed by ruling
party supporters. The authorities took
measures to control the spread of a cholera
outbreak which killed at least 100 people
and affected thousands more. Women and
girls were denied their right to sexual and
reproductive health. New legislation went
some way to addressing children’s need for
protection.

BACKGROUND
President Emmerson Mnangagwa won a
second term in office in the general elections,
which took place on 22 and 23 August, and
in which the electorate also voted for
legislators and local authority representatives.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
The rights to freedom of expression,
association and peaceful assembly continued
to be threatened, especially during the
general election period. Members of the main
opposition party, the Citizens Coalition for
Change (CCC), were the main targets of
repression.
Just over one month before election day, the
president signed into law the Criminal Law
(Codification and Reform) Amendment Act,
2022. It failed to meet the requirements of
legality, proportionality and necessity in
relation to the imposition by the authorities of
penalties like loss of citizenship and the
death penalty against people simply for
peacefully exercising their human rights. It
heightened the risk of arbitrary detention
against those who expressed dissenting
views, and contained overly broad provisions
that criminalized participation in meetings.
University of Zimbabwe students Benjamin
Watadza, Emmanuel Chitima, Comfort
Mpofu, Lionel Madamombe, Gamuchirai

The State of the World’s Human Rights

Chaburumunda and Darlington Chigwena
were all arrested at different times between
17 May and 8 June for staging a peaceful
protest in the capital, Harare. They were
demonstrating against the prolonged
detention and other persecution of opposition
politicians, including Job Sikhala (see below,
Arbitrary detention and unfair trials). They
were charged with disorderly conduct under
section 41 of the Criminal Law (Codification
and Reform) Act, and released from custody
on various dates between 5 and 24 July.
On 23 August, security force agents
arbitrarily arrested about 40 staff members of
the civil society organizations the Election
Resource Centre and the Zimbabwe Election
Support Network. The arrests were
connected to the publication of a report by
the Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum
detailing the electoral irregularities it
observed on 23 August. After their arrests,
police seized their mobile phones, and forced
them to lie face-down for three hours. They
were held incommunicado at Harare Central
Police Station for two days, denied access to
their lawyers or family members in
contravention of provisions under the
constitution and international standards of
fairness. On 25 August, they were charged
with contravening section 66 of the Electoral
Act as read with the Criminal Law
(Codification and Reform) Act and released
on bail of USD 200 each. The authorities
alleged that they had attempted to announce
the election results ahead of the Zimbabwe
Electoral Commission’s official
announcement.
Suspected state agents were responsible for
a series of abductions of CCC activists, during
and after the election. On 26 August, plainclothes agents disrupted a CCC conference,
and attempted to arrest party spokesperson
Promise Mkwananzi. This was followed by a
series of abductions, again by alleged state
agents, including of city council member
Womberaiishe Nhende and his friend Sonele
Mukhuhlani who were tortured before being
dumped on the outskirts of Harare on 2
September. On 23 October James Chidhakwa
was abducted, tortured and injected with an

415

unknown substance; Takudzwa Ngadziore
was abducted on 1 November; and
Tapfumanei Masaya was abducted on 11
November and his body was found dumped
in Cleveland, Harare, on 13 November.
ARBITRARY DETENTION AND UNFAIR TRIALS
There was impunity for the arbitrary detention
and prosecution of human rights defenders,
political opposition members and supporters,
activists, journalists and others expressing
dissenting views. The authorities misused the
justice system to silence peaceful dissent.
On 5 April, Fadzayi Mahere, a CCC MP and
former party spokesperson, was convicted of
publishing or communicating false
statements prejudicial to the state under
section 31 of the Criminal Law (Reform and
Codification) Act and fined USD 500 after
she posted a video on social media in
January 2021 showing a woman struggling
with a police officer while holding a
motionless baby. Fadzayi Mahere handed
herself over to the police on 11 January and
was detained for seven days before being
granted bail by a Harare magistrate.
On 28 April, Jacob Ngarivhume, the leader
of opposition party Transform Zimbabwe, was
convicted and sentenced to 48 months’
imprisonment, 12 of which were suspended.
He had been arrested in July 2020 for
leading and organizing anti-corruption
protests in the same month. He was accused
of inciting public violence by using his Twitter
(now known as X) handle to convene
nationwide protests which were ultimately
suppressed by security forces. On 11
December 2023, he was acquitted on appeal
after spending eight months in prison.
Job Sikhala, former CCC MP for Zengeza
West constituency, was convicted by a
magistrates’ court on 3 May on “obstruction
of justice” charges almost a year after his
arrest in June 2022, and ordered to pay a
fine of USD 600. On 28 November, he was
acquitted on appeal but remained in
Chikurubi Maximum Security Prison in
Harare pending his trial on separate charges
of incitement to commit violence and
disorderly conduct. The charge related to a
speech he made at the wake of Moreblessing

416

Ali, who was abducted allegedly by a
Zimbabwe African National Union – Patriotic
Front (ZANU-PF) ruling party supporter in
2022. Her body was found three weeks later.
On 15 August, 40 CCC activists were
arrested following an election campaign
roadshow in Machipisa in Highfields, a
township in Harare. They were charged with
contravening provisions of the Maintenance
of Peace and Order Act and released on bail
on 24 August.
On 4 September, the authorities arrested
Doug Coltart and Tapiwa Muchineripi, of
Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights, for
advising the police that their clients,
Womberaiishe Nhende and Sonele
Mukhuhlani, were in poor health and under
medical review following their abduction and
torture by state agents (see above,
Repression of dissent). The lawyers were
charged with “obstruction of justice”,
released on bail by the Harare Magistrates
Court on 5 September and ordered to report
weekly to Harare Central Police Station.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
Tinashe Chitsunge, a CCC activist, was
reportedly stoned to death by ZANU-PF
cadres in Glen View South, Harare, on 3
August. He was believed to have been
attacked while trying to flee from a ZANU-PF
mob who were attacking opposition activists
at a rally.
CCC activist Vutisani Mushiyi was admitted
to Chiredzi hospital after being attacked in
the town of Chiredzi South, on 4 August by
suspected ZANU-PF supporters. He claimed
that he was attacked in retaliation for his
refusal to quit as chairperson of the Chilonga
Irrigation Scheme in Chiredzi South after a
ZANU-PF parliamentary candidate had tried
to make him do so.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The country grappled with a cholera
outbreak, stemming primarily from a severe
lack of clean water. As of late September,
almost 7,000 suspected new cases were
recorded, and by 9 October the death toll
had reached 100. Zimbabwe faced recurring

The State of the World’s Human Rights

cholera outbreaks exacerbated by poverty
and inadequate infrastructure.
In the town of Chitungwiza, shortages of
clean water forced residents to buy bottled
water. Local activists urged the government to
intervene, emphasizing the undue strain
placed on local authorities to ensure better
access to water and the high cost of watertreating chemicals. As the number of cholera
cases increased, sewage management
problems and ineffective refuse collection
posed additional challenges, raising fears that
the crisis would worsen with the approaching
rainy season.
President Mnangagwa’s pledge during his
election campaign in July to implement a
nationwide borehole-drilling programme to
ensure greater access to clean water,
remained largely unfulfilled due to the
persistence of historical underinvestment and
wealth disparities.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS

462 deaths per 100,000 live births,
according to the most recent statistics from
the UN Population Fund.
Child marriage was common. An estimated
33% of women between the ages of 20 and
24 were first married under the age of 18.
The August election results did not bring
any significant improvements to the underrepresentation of women in decision-making
positions. Only six of the 26 cabinet members
appointed in September were women. Of the
70 women who stood for election to National
Assembly seats, only 22 were successful,
compared to 637 men.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
On 19 July, the Children’s Amendment Act
No 8 of 2023 was enacted. Positive
provisions include the removal of all clauses
that refer to anyone under the age of 18 as a
young person, defining them instead as
children in line with the constitution.

The government failed to take measures to
prevent and fully respond to the treatment
needs of those suffering from obstetric fistula.
Specifically, it did not develop an adequate
policy framework or ensure adequate funding
for maternal health, despite calls from civil
society organizations to do so, and despite
the issue being raised in parliament as a
matter of national importance.
Gaps in the legal framework relating to
access to sexual and reproductive health
services for adolescents persisted. Parliament
continued to fail to make the necessary
amendments to the Public Health Act to
allow health workers to provide sexual and
reproductive health services to adolescents
without their parents’ consent. In addition,
the cost of essential healthcare services
proved prohibitive for many women and girls
and there was a failure to provide
comprehensive sex education in schools.
Teenage pregnancy remained prevalent,
with 108 live births per 1,000 women and
girls aged between 15 and 19. The
government’s pledge to reduce it to 100 per
1,000 women by 2022 was still unrealized in
2023. Maternal mortality remained high, with

The State of the World’s Human Rights

417

